



First Teaching of the Last Message:

The Divine Science and Its Six Pillars







Umar F. Abd-Allāh Wymann-Landgraf





















































Foreword



A Note to the Reader

To begin with, this book like many Traditional Islamic texts is written to be read out loud in the presence of readers, listeners, and reader-listeners with the assistance of authorized teachers. Therefore, instead of just speaking of the reader, I often like to use the term “reader-listener” to refer to the people studying this work or, occasionally, the cumbersome expression “reader, listener, and reader-listener.” Since it is monotonous to cite all three of these roles continually, I often mention only the “reader-listener,” but I like to keep all three types of receptors clearly in mind: “readers, listeners, and reader-listeners,” since each of them is one of the book’s target audiences.





Preliminaries for Each Reader-Listener

In what follows, we speak about Functional Certitude as the basis of sound Teacher-Student relationships. Personally, I earnestly desire such a sound Teacher-Student Relationship with every reader-listener, and I will strive throughout the book to prove myself worthy of their trust. The First Teaching is a “Teaching.” It is not a narrative or just a book. In this work, I present myself—not as an ordinary academic narrator—but as an Educator. This approach is central to the book’s fundamental purpose and ethos, encapsulating an entire educational philosophy, which is not only vital to the book’s success but—I believe—a crucial and much needed contribution in today’s highly impersonal world. Thus—to begin with—it is important for the reader-listener to know me as a Human Being in context. This is why I deem the book’s autobiographical insert which follows to be central to its purpose. At the same time, however, I—as an Educator—also seek a positive Teacher-Student relationship with each reader-listener as a Human Being in context. 



Because this Teaching seeks this special relationship with its readers, listeners, and reader-listeners—whatever their background or the level of their formal education—it is helpful for them to have an idea of how this Teaching is meant to relate to them personally and what it expects of them. As frequently noted, The First Teaching is meant to be read out loud to reader-listeners who attend to it as closely as possible and who will hopefully be able to ask questions and receive answers.



Beginnings are all-important, a Principle that I will repeatedly explain and advocate for throughout this book. Even when we have been blessed with good beginnings, we should strive to make new and better ones each day. In this sense, I hope that The First Teaching will be like a “first new and promising day” for each reader-listener, no matter what has gone before—however good or bad—but with confidence that all the best is yet to come. As part of its ethos, The First Teaching aspires to be a pure and freely bestowed gift (‘aṭā’), expecting nothing in return. Thus, the Book is meant to empower everyone who garners something from it and to give greater meaning to their lives. The work is written in a spirit of service, love, and empathy, and it, in turn, seeks to inspire compassion and positive feeling in the reader-listener—as well as self-confidence, self-esteem, and compassion toward themselves and others. Thus, The First Teaching actively invites each reader-listener to “hitch their wagon to a star.” Or—as Emily Dickinson—might say: “Allow the little Bird of Hope to perch inside your Soul.”



It is natural for us to take our lives seriously, and that is also one of the primary signs of sound mental health. At the same time, we must take existence itself in the greatest of earnest, which means that we must learn how to contemplate existence and the world around us properly—not just as an act of cognition but as an act of supreme Virtue and Morality. For this reason, The First Teaching places much emphasis upon cognition. How do we think? How do we know what is True and what is False? How do we know that the objective world actually exists and that we perceive it accurately as it is in itself? All of this challenging undertaking is done with the profound hope that each reader, listener, and reader-listener will themselves fully engage in the process of sound cognition and thought.



The Bible says: “Prove all things. Hold fast to what is good” (1 Thessalonians, 5:21). In a similar vein, the Anglican Book of Common Prayer urges the Believer: “Read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest.” This beautiful admonition means “read and listen carefully.” “Mark” or “take notes.” Learn through study and devotion, and, finally, ponder carefully and repeatedly what you have gleaned by “digesting it inwardly” in order to gain lasting wisdom. It is my desire that, for every reader-listener, The First Teaching will be looked upon in the light of such good counsel and receive this same worthy response from each of them as an attentive and actively engaged reader-listener.



Robert Browning said: “Man partly is and wholly hopes to be.” May The First Teaching enable each reader-listener to attain their greatest hopes and fullest growth so that—again, to quote Browning: “The best is yet to be,/The last of life, for which the first was made.” May God fill the heart of each reader-listener with wonder, which is the basis of wisdom and of all sound Philosophical and Metaphysical speculation. To know consciously how we know and think and to be able to learn actively is an immeasurable treasure, while honest self-reflection, which follows from such knowledge, has proved throughout the ages to be the School of Wisdom in all generations. The Bible states about wisdom: “No mention shall be made of coral or of pearls. For the price of wisdom is above rubies” (Job, 28:18). Knowledge can be communicated in words, but wisdom cannot. It requires good Companionship and living Human relationships. Therefore, knowledge comes and goes. It increases and decreases. We learn, and we forget, but wisdom stays with us forever. In conclusion, though, let me note in all seriousness and humility that among the well-known supplications of The Book of Common Prayer is its famous invocation: “Give peace in our time, O Lord.” May The First Teaching be a medium through which mutual understanding is increased in our time, helping to lead—by the God’s eternal Grace—to mutual understanding between all nations and lasting peace in our time.





A Few Words about Myself





Family Roots & Personal Background

In Islam, different ethnic roots, Cultural backgrounds, languages, and nationalities are set forth as Divine Signs, through which people are meant to gain wisdom and a deeper appreciation of one another. By virtue of these variations, we come to know the reality of the Human condition, hopefully learning how Human Beings complement each other to the mutual benefit of all. Thus, our outward diversity is meant not to divide us or pit us against each other but to unite us, enabling us to profit fully from each other and create the miracle of beneficial Civilization. The Qur’ān states:



O Mankind! Truly, We created you from a [single] male and a [single] female, and We made you peoples and tribes, so that you may come to know one another: Surely, the most noble of you before God are the most reverent among you: Truly, God is All-Knowing [and] Cognizant [of every thing]” (The Private Rooms, 49:13).



In light of the importance of personal and ethnic background, I will now provide some insight into my family, since they played a meaningful role in my life and personal formation. I hope that this parenthesis will neither be excessive nor cumbersome. I do, however, owe an immense debt to my family, which I feel it is my duty to acknowledge in any honest account of myself. Optimism and the Protestant Work Ethic, for example, were deeply instilled in my nature, and both were central to my family’s Protestant Middle Western Culture. It was indeed that background which imparted to me the conviction that a person should work hard and aim high in life, hoping for great things and living by the motto of Ralph Waldo Emerson: “Hitch your wagon to a star.” Moreover, as the Bible advises: “If you have gathered nothing in your youth, how can you find anything in your old age?” (Ecclesiastes, 25:3). In this second regard, I thank God for my forebears as well as my immediate family, whose attentive upbringing constantly encouraged me to “gather” as much during my youth as possible and then strive to pursue that course for the rest of my life. In this same vein, I strongly encourage each reader-listener of The First Teaching—young and old—to exert themselves in seeking knowledge and to be optimistic, while also seeking to “gather” as much as possible from this work and others. It has always been my personal guiding principle that: “Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well,” and I extend that same advice to the reader-listener in the spirit of mutual respect, general courtesy, and hopefulness.



My father’s Weinman side (Swiss German: Wymann) were of Lutheran stock, hailing from Canton Bern in Switzerland. My mother’s Landgraf side immigrated to the United States toward the middle of the thirteenth/nineteenth century. They were Hessian Germans and devoted Roman Catholics from Upper Saulheim in Germany’s Southern Rhineland region. In Western Kansas, however, the predominant religious influence of Protestantism induced the Landgrafs to adopt Calvinist Protestant Christianity, which made them, as a family, generally inclined towards the Congregationalist, Presbyterian, and Methodist Churches.



Both sides of the family settled in the Middle West of the United States. The Weinmans (Wymanns) ultimately made their home in Round Valley, Nebraska during the last quarter of the thirteenth/nineteenth century. There they intermarried with the Freeman (Ames, Eames) family, whose roots went back to the earliest English colonists in Boxford, Massachusetts during the first half of the eleventh/seventeenth century. The Ames family later helped settle New Hampshire, Connecticut, and New York State—where they changed their surname to Freeman—then moving on to Michigan and Nebraska. The Landgrafs, on the other hand, made their way down to Western Kansas from Wisconsin in the early fourteenth/twentieth century, where they settled in and around Garden City. There they intermarried with the Marmon (Merrimoon) family, who had emigrated from England to the colonies of Virginia and North Carolina during the first decade of the twelfth/eighteenth century, later moving on to take part in the settlement of Ohio, Michigan, Iowa, and Kansas.                                



Both families lived primarily as farmers, although my grandfather, Joseph Ephraim Weinman (d. 1391/1971), and my father, Donald Eugene Weinman (d. 1415/1994), became veterinarians and later university professors of Veterinary Medicine. In 1376/1957, Donald Weinman took our family from Albion, Nebraska, where he had a veterinary practice, to Athens, Georgia, becoming an Instructor of Veterinary Anatomy at the University of Georgia’s School of Veterinary Medicine. Let me insert at this point that I believe—on the basis of family experience—that being a good veterinarian is a beautiful way of life and hardly at all any ordinary profession. For, to be an adept veterinarian, sensitivity is required, and he or she must be an observant and excellent listener. As an “animal doctor,” the veterinarian treats every day “patients” that cannot speak or describe their pains and ailments. Thus, the skilled veterinarian is required to sit patiently, listen, and observe subtle signs. 



The family remained in Athens at the University of Georgia for seven years from 1376/1957 until 1384/1964. During that time, my father, Donald Eugene Weinman, completed a second Ph.D. in biochemistry at the University of Georgia, by which he supplemented his doctoral work in Veterinary Medicine by adding a new focus upon DNA. My mother, Grace Marian Landgraf Weinman (d. 1428/2007), pursued undergraduate and graduate studies in English literature at the University of Georgia. She fulfilled most of the requirements for her doctorate, but the family left Georgia before she could complete her Ph.D. In 1383/1963 at the age of fifteen and while still in Georgia, I was decorated as an Eagle Scout and was also selected for admission to the Order of the Arrow honorary fellowship.



Ultimately, the family left Georgia, finally moving to Columbia, Missouri in 1385/1965, where my father, Donald Weinman, assumed a professorship in Veterinary Medicine at the University of Missouri. During the same time, Marian Weinman, my mother, took a position as an English composition instructor in the university’s English Department. I entered the University of Missouri in the fall of 1385/1965, ultimately receiving with honors my Bachelor’s Degree in 1389/1969 in the Arts and Sciences as a member of the Phi Beta Kappa Honorary Society and a dual major in history and English literature. That same year, I was awarded a Woodrow Wilson Honorary Fellowship, which facilitated my being awarded a full scholarship at Cornell University as a Ph.D. candidate in English literature, concentrating in Shakespeare and Renaissance Studies.



I received my Ph.D. in Arabic and Islamic Studies at the University of Chicago. Prior to receiving my degree, I taught Islamic studies at the University of Windsor, Ontario in 1397/1977 and Temple University in Philadelphia from 1397/1977 until 1398/1978. After receiving my Ph.D., I was given a tenure-track post in Islamic Studies at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor from 1398/1978 until 1402/1982. But I then decided to leave academia and went to Granada, Spain, where I taught Arabic in Albaicin from 1402/1982 until 1404/1984. In 1404/1984, I was granted a position in the Department of Islamic Studies at King Abdulaziz University in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, teaching Islamic Culture and Comparative Religion with classes conducted in Arabic, a position that I held for sixteen years until 1421/2000.



In the late summer of 1421/2000, I left Saudi Arabia and moved to Chicago, Illinois, where I became the Scholar in Residence of the newly formed Nawawi Foundation, which focused primarily upon developing cultural consciousness and positive identity in the growing Muslim Community of the United States. In 1432/2011, I moved on from the Nawawi Foundation to begin work with what, in 1434/2013, would be called the Oasis Initiative, seeking to instill sound seeking to instill sound knowledge of the Islamic Tradition (al-Irth al-Islāmī) in Muslim Communities through promoting learning, empowering the individual, and supporting the Divine path of service and love.



My Journey to the Declaration of God’s Oneness & Islam

I was born on 2 Jumādā al-Ākhira 1367/April 11, 1948, in Columbus, Nebraska and christened Larry Gene Weinman. My family were Protestants, and Christianity made up a standard component of my family life, although we remained somewhat distant from local congregations and rarely became much involved in Church work. Nevertheless, all family members looked forward to attending Sunday School classes and Church services together on a weekly basis, after which we would go out for a Sunday afternoon meal in a restaurant of choice. From an early age, I sang in the choir and performed church solos, while my mother often played the piano. During the first eleven years of my life, our family took an essentially Calvinist path—affiliated directly or indirectly with John Calvin and his successors—attending Congregationalist, Presbyterian, and Methodist churches. 



In early 1379/1960, when I was eleven years old, my family discovered and began to attend a relatively small Lutheran congregation, having been attracted to the local pastor’s engaging outreach and the relevance of his preaching. From the beginning of our attendance, my father instructed me to take notes on the pastor’s Sunday sermons, which I would transcribe diligently, although without actually being able to understand what the pastor was saying. In 1380/1961, I began Catechism classes under the pastor’s personal auspices, which finally brought my understanding to a higher level. I enjoyed the classes and took them seriously. I also belonged to the choir, sang occasional solos, and, by the age of twelve, was designated as a church Acolyte. I fully committed the Shorter Catechism of Martin Luther to memory, which greatly pleased my mother and persuaded the Pastor that I might grow up to be of service to the Church.



At the age of twelve after completing Catechism, I was granted official confirmation in the Lutheran Church. But almost immediately after my confirmation, my father, by merely asking a simple question, made me conscious of the fact that the Trinity was open to question. His apparent reservations about the Trinity affected me deeply, leading me to question my Pastor about the validity of the Doctrine only a few days later. Since neither my Pastor nor anyone else could remove these newly discovered doubts about the Trinity from me, I gradually became more cynical and ultimately drifted from the Church. By the age of sixteen, I hardly believed or practiced any more. But toward the end of 1387/1967—at the age of nineteen—while still an undergraduate at the University of Missouri, I underwent an initial Spiritual awakening. As a result of this intense experience, I became convinced that God is truly One and not Triune (Three-in-One). I then set out to put my life right and seek a living relationship with God, although I found it impossible to attain this Divine connection until I finally embraced Islam at Cornell University a little more than two years later.



I embraced Islam as a graduate student at Cornell University on 25 Shawwāl 1389/3 January 1970, after reading The Autobiography of Malcolm X, which was required reading in an English Department course on African-American Literature in which I had enrolled. Conversion to Islam brought to culmination my personal search for the One God, while also giving rise to powerful new directions in my life, especially by ultimately changing my field of graduate study to Arabic and the Islamic Sciences. Another new direction was that I decided to get a new name, and on 14 Jumādā al-Ākhira 1392/24 July 1972, I officially changed my legal name to Umar Faruq Abd-Allah in the Boone County Circuit Court of Columbia, Missouri, where I was residing at the time. I did not begin adding the appendix Wymann-Landgraf as my surname, however, until some twenty years later after 1412/1992, as a result of learning more about my family genealogy and in emulation of the Iberian and Latin American convention of hyphenated paternal-maternal last names.



In the summer of 1392/1972, under my new name, Umar Faruq Abd-Allah, I applied to the graduate school of the University of Chicago, where I was awarded a full scholarship to pursue Arabic and Islamic studies in the Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations. In Ramaḍān of 1398/September 1978, I completed my Ph.D. with honors and distinction at the University of Chicago for a dissertation titled “Mālik’s Concept of ‘Amal in the Light of Mālikī Legal Theory.” The study was written under the direction of my advisor, Fazlur Rahman (d. 1408/1988), with the supervision of professors Wilferd Madelung (d. 1444/2023) and Jaroslav Stetkevych (d. 1442/2021).





Spiritual Pathways: Traversing New Heights 

In the eighteen years between my relocation to Spain in 1402/1982 until my return to the United States in 1421/2000, I was given multiple opportunities to keep the company of authentic representatives of Traditional Islamic teaching and Spirituality, many of them Scholars and Spiritual Guides—both men and women—hailing from across the Muslim world. At the time of this book’s writing, my living connection with such Traditional Teachers and Guides has lasted for more than forty-three years. In 1425/2004, four years after returning to the United States, I officially adopted the Qādirī Path of al-Shaykh ‘Abd-al-Qādir al-Jīlānī, although I had, in fact, already been directly associated with that Path and others since 1405/1985. Today, I maintain my link with the Qādirī Path, striving in accordance with its guidelines of service and love to be of benefit to all of God’s creation. For, as al-Shaykh ‘Abd-al-Qādir taught: “Sufism is Truthfulness with [God], the Real, and good character toward His creation” (al-Taṣawwuf huwa al-ṣidq ma‘a al-Ḥaqq wa ḥusn al-khuluq ma‘a al-khalq). 



The Bible states: “To everything there is a season and a time for every purpose under heaven” (Ecclesiastes, 3:1). I hope that the months and years ahead will be a fruitful season and edifying time for me, perfectly suited to bring The First Teaching to fullest completion as a major life’s work. To quote Emerson again: “The reward of a thing well done is to get it done.” It is my express hope to do that and then spend any future years that I am granted in amending The First Teaching, while also teaching, condensing, and translating it. The book is also planned to be the first publication of the Trumpet Tree Press. At the time of this writing, I remain happily engaged in independent research, writing, and teaching at the Oasis Initiative, while occasionally taking part in educational tours in the United States, Canada, Great Britain, Europe, Africa, South Asia, Nusantara, South America, and elsewhere. My focus is upon the Science of Divinity, the Sharī‘a Sciences, and Islamic Spirituality as well as general religious and world history.

                                   



Other Works





Monographs

“Mālik’s Concept of ‘Amal in the Light of Mālikī Legal Theory,” 2 Vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Ph.D. Thesis, 1978).

The Islamic Struggle in Syria, (Berkeley, CA: Mizan Press, 1983).

A Muslim in Victorian America: The Life of Alexander Russell Webb, (New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2006).

Mālik and Medina: Islamic Reasoning in the Formative Period, (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2013).

Al-Īmān Fiṭra: Dirāsa li-al-Īmān al-Fiṭrī fī al-Qur’ān wa al-Sunna wa Kathīr min al-Milal wa al-Niḥal, (Abu Dhabi, Dar al-Faqih Publishing and Distribution, 1435/2014).

The Devotion of al-Imām al-Nawawī: Translation, Introduction, and Commentary, ([Allentown, PA]: Ihya Publishing, 2017). 





Articles & Papers

“Mercy, the Stamp of Creation,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2004), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“One God, Many Names,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2004), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“Islam and the Cultural Imperative,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2004), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“Do Christians and Muslims Worship the Same God?” in The Christian Century (August 24, 2004), pp. 34-36.

“Seek Knowledge in China: Thinking beyond the Abrahamic Box,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2006), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“Innovation and Creativity in Islam,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2006), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“Islam and the Cultural Imperative,” reprinted in Cross Currents (Fall 2006), pp. 357-375.

“Living Islam with Purpose,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2007), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications

“Theological Dimensions of Islamic Law” in The Cambridge Companion to Islamic Theology, (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2008), pp. 237-257.

“Creativity, Innovation, and Heresy in Islam” in Voices of Islam, Vol. 5: Voices of Change, ed. Vincent Cornell, (West Port, CT: Praeger Press, 2007), 5:1-21.

“Turks, Moors, and Moriscos in Early America: Sir Francis Drake’s Liberated Galley Slaves and the Lost Colony of Roanoke,” A Nawawi Foundation Paper (2010), available at https://www.theoasisinitiative.org/publications





Earlier Academic Publications

“The Nature of Ethical Speculation in ash-Shāṭibī’s Thought,” in The Maghreb Review, VI (1981), pp. 19-26.

“Fasting” and “Friday Prayers,” in The Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages, 1981.

“The Perceptible and the Unseen: The Qur’ānic Conception of Man’s Relationship to God and Realities beyond Human Perception,” in Mormons and Muslims: Spiritual Foundations and Modern Manifestations (Provo, UT: Bringham Young University, Religious Studies Center: 1983), pp. 153-204.

“Abû Ḥanîfah,” in Encyclopaedia Iranica, (London etc.: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983), 1:295-301.

“The Qur’ānic Conception of the Word,” A University of Michigan Memorial Edition on the Word in Honor of the Late Professor James Bailey, ed. Roy Rappaport, 1984.



Points of Style & Technique





Translation

Each Human language makes up a unique cognitive universe of its own. Consequently, “literal” translation from one language to another tends to betray the original reference and rarely amounts to an actual “translation,” which ideally should faithfully “transfer” and “carry over” the feel and meaning of the primary account to the language of translation. Thus, it is said in Italian: “Traduttore, traditore” (To translate is to commit treason).



As a rule, The First Teaching avoids verbatim translations. I prefer instead to make my own amendments or new renditions of standing translations—especially whenever I have adequate familiarity with the foreign language being used. Thus, for example, in quoting John 8:32—“And you shall know the truth, and the truth will set you free”—cited below, I took liberties with the Vulgate version of the Latin translation: “Et cognōscētis vēritātem et vēritās līberābit vōs.” In this version, St. Jerome follows the literal word-for-word semantic structure of the Greek rendition of the verse, which is his custom throughout his version of the Latin Bible and reflects the awe he felt for the Greek original. Instead, I restructured it as: “Et cognōscētis vēritātem et vēritās vos līberābit,” which is only a slight change but is a more idiomatically sound Latin rendition of the original.



As regards the Qur’ān in particular, for which a number of competent translations are now available, I typically consult a variety of those works but usually arrive at my own wording. Thus, in my renditions of the Qur’ān, I hardly ever rely upon any given English interpretation but exercise my own judgment in attempting to render the final form in idiomatic English, which I hope can be clearly understood. Arabic in its purest and most ancient form is a highly elliptical language, which in Arabian culture required actively engaged and not passively receptive listeners, who would listen attentively, fully receive, and mentally complete the meanings they heard—especially regarding elliptical expressions. Consequently, I generally indicate such instances of ellipsis and other subtle textual implications by using square brackets, as in the following translation:



Even if We [God] had opened up for them a gateway [above them] into Heaven and they had proceeded to ascend through it [higher and higher], they would [still] have said: “Our eyes are only hallucinating. No [undoubtedly], we are a people who have been spellbound by sorcery” (Ḥijr, 15:14-15).  



Although ellipsis and rich semantics are exceedingly common in the Qur’ān, they are also typical of Prophetic Ḥadīth, Arabic aphorisms, and Traditional Arabic texts in general, and I have used brackets to indicate ellipsis and other subtleties in all such translations. I follow this same procedure in other translated languages as well, whenever appropriate—especially in Biblical translations, which also contain significant amounts of ellipsis.





Transliteration

The First Teaching pays attention to standard modes of transliteration for Arabic, Hebrew, Syriac, Aramaic, Greek, Chinese, Persian, Urdu, and other languages. With regard to Hebrew, for example, long vowels are sometimes presented with a carrot macron (upside-down “v”) such as “ô” but a straight macron, as in “ō,” at other times. The two sounds are identical in pronunciation, but Scholars use the different transliteration signs to reflect the variant spellings of the Biblical Hebrew text. Thus, the two different types of accents only indicate that the long vowel is actually written out in the Hebrew text—as with “ô”—but unwritten and orally transmitted—in the case of “ō.” In accord with this principle, for example, I transliterate the principal Hebrew words for God as Elōhîm, hā-Elōhîm, and hā-Elôah. Wherever the carrot macron is used—as in the last vowel of Elōhîm—the written text actually inserts a long yodh (yā’) vowel-consonant. The straight macron over the “ō” indicates that it is also pronounced as long, but no long vowel is spelled out in the received Hebrew text. 



I apply this same convention to Aramaic, which is treated like Hebrew, but not to Syriac, in which case only a straight macron accent is used for all long vowels, which is also the case in Arabic. As a matter of personal convenience, I have written the Hebrew, Aramaic, and Syriac short vowel shwa (shěwā’) as “e” instead of an upside down “e,” (ə) or “ě”. The Hebrew “s” known as samekh (Hebrew: ס) is written as “s,” as in “Joseph” (Hebrew: Yôseph), which is written with samekh in the Biblical Hebrew. The Hebrew “s” called sīn (Hebrew: שׂ) is written as “ś,” as in “Israel” (Hebrew: Yiśrā’ēl), which is written with sīn in the Bible. The sīn is identical in shape to the Hebrew shīn (Hebrew: שׁ), which is transliterated as “sh.” In fully punctuated Hebrew texts, the sīn and shin are distinguished by different dots over the left and right of the shared letter—as can be seen in the examples given. Hebrew, Aramaic, and Syriac have six consonants— “b, g, d, k, p, t”—which occur in both “hard” and “soft” forms. When they are hard, they are written as: “b, g, d, k, p, t.” But when they are soft, they are transliterated as “bh, gh, dh, kh, ph, th,” which is a standard Scholarly norm.



In a manner similar to Hebrew, Greek transliterations simply follow the received spelling without reference to the often-controversial question of how the text was actually pronounced. Thus, for example, the New Testament Greek: “Speak the truth with love” is rendered “álētheúein én ágápē,” which corresponds letter-for-letter to the written Greek form: “άληθεύειν έν άγάπη.”



Chinese transliteration follows the pronunciation of standard Mandarin (Hanyu Pinyin) instead of Cantonese (Wade-Giles). The accent of the vowels “á,” “í,” and “ú” are “rising tones.” And the vowels “à,” “ì,” and “ù” are falling tones. Both types are seen in the names of the great Chinese Muslim Sages Wáng Dàiyú and Liú Zhì. The carrot macron (upside-down “v”) is used for the “rising-falling tone” as in the word “Tî” for “Heaven” in Shang Tî (Heaven’s Lord), a Traditional Name of God in Ancient Chinese. Unaccented Chinese vowels are monotones as in the word Shang (Lord) and are written without an accent.





Footnotes

As a rule, I use footnotes throughout The First Teaching to give additional explanation and supplementary clarification for citations in the main text, which are not likely to be readily understood by all reader-listeners. Such fuller elucidation can be seen, for example, in the notes on “Immanentism,” “Exemplarism,” “Magisterial religion,” “Nominalism,” “Scientism,” “Metaphysics,” and so forth. Footnotes are also used extensively in The First Teaching as running commentary, which can be seen, for example, in the lengthy notes provided for “Synthetic history,” the Dead Sea Scrolls, the historic Battles of Yarmūk and al-Qādisiyya in 15/636, “the Renegades” (European converts to Islam in the Renaissance and Early Modern periods), and “the Global Monoculture.” As detailed explanations of words and running commentaries for the main text, the footnotes are essential to the book’s pedagogical purpose. 



Incremental Repetitions

Repetition is often regarded as an academic blight and a stylistic defect in writing. I have, however, intentionally allowed for much repetition in The First Teaching, given the fact that much of its information is new to reader-listeners. Such material is not only novel, it is also crucial for understanding the text properly, and I do not expect any receptors to take it upon themselves to go back to the first entry of the material. Moreover, in the Islamic Tradition, repetition is regarded as one of the requirements of good instruction. As an exemplary teacher, the Prophet Muḥammad would, for example, often repeat his words three times for emphasis and to ensure that they were properly understood and committed to memory.



Although some Scholars and advanced students may find my frequent repetitions unnecessary and even tedious, I ask their pardon, but I have intended these reiterations to be incremental for the benefit of new students, especially those who have still not become adequately familiar with the material and easily forget what they have just learned. Footnotes, as just noted, carry upon their backs the heavy weight of this compendium, and they are by design often very detailed as well as highly repetitive. The material in the footnotes usually reappears elsewhere in the book either verbatim or with modifications, so that reader-listeners are not burdened with having to go back to the earlier mention of those notes.  



Frequent Citation of Proverbs, Adages, & Famous Quotations

The First Teaching regularly cites proverbs, adages, and famous quotations, since they embellish the text and benefit many readers, listeners, and reader-listeners. Proverbs are much meaning decorated by few words, and it is said: “A proverb is one Man’s wit and all Men’s wisdom.” These Truths hold equally well for all Modern adages and famous passages just as they do for Traditional proverbs.



Thomas Mann said: “Speech is civilization itself.” Proverbs, adages, famous quotations, and Traditional words of religious and secular wisdom stand out among the greatest examples of speech and, therefore, building blocks of Civilization. In a somewhat similar spirit, Samuel Johnson averred: “Every quotation contributes something to the stability or enlargement of the language.” Consequently, noteworthy quotations, proverbs, and the like are exquisite jewels that ornament books and add to the rich tapestry of a good text. By contrast, the poet Thomas Peacock held that any book which furnishes no quotations is not a book at all but a toy.





Standard Underlining, Not Bold Faced 

Underlines are used to draw attention to words, quotations, important parts of verses, major principles, precepts, ideas, and the like. Underlining is often regarded as stylistically less appropriate in contemporary writing, but I have still found it to be of use in this work and did not want to avoid it altogether. Thus, for example, the following Qur’ānic verse has an underline to emphasize its relevance in context: “He created you from a single Soul, then made from it its mate, and [He] sent down for you of cattle eight pairs...” (The Throngs, 39:6). Likewise, in discussing the Dead Sea Scrolls, underlining is used, for example, to emphasize a particular teaching the Scroll-Keepers had regarding the Prophet of the End of Days: “He will probe the secrets of all living creatures. No schemes will succeed against him, and his wisdom will go forth to all peoples.”



Bold Face & Bold Face Underlined

I use bold highlighting with or without underlining to indicate that the material highlighted is important and is being mentioned for the first time or repeated because of its import. Bold face is used for introducing Scholars—such as Ibn al-‘Arabī—special terminology—such as Immanentism—and even words like God and Foreordination, whenever I believe my use of such references requires clarification in the Footnotes for the reader-listeners so that the material is not misunderstood. Bold print—with or without underlining—may also be used to draw attention to certain passages—such as particular working in a Qur’ānic passage or Prophetic Ḥadīth. Nevertheless, in such cases, simple underlining without boldface would be my preferred method. The First Teaching will also be supplemented with a special website of its own to add helpful details and images, amendments and corrections that were not part of the original text. Entries in The First Teaching that end with an asterix—such as: Civilization (al-‘Umrān)*—indicate special pedagogical guidelines for the author and authorized reader-teachers in presenting the printed text during their sessions with readers, listeners, and reader-listeners.  



Capitalization

Modern publishers often discourage extensive use of capitals, but such rules are often modified in specialized works like this compendium. Moreover, experienced editors understand that there are no universal rules in English for the use or avoidance of capital letters. It is now customary, for example, to capitalize the word “Black” for African-Americans and people of African origins, however dark or light their color. I follow a similar procedure in The First Teaching but also use capitalization for the word “White,” when referring to people of light skin color. In passing, one of the important Paradigms of this work is that genealogy and neither color nor language determine race. Thus, there is no thing as a “White race” or a “Black race,” nor, for that matter, a “Yellow,” “Red,” or “Brown race.” Nor is there an English, German, or French race, if merely speaking those tongues is used as the measure by which such “races” are determined, for people adopt different languages throughout the generations—despite their original ethnic origins—according to the fortuities of history. All such false notions of “race” belong to the host of Plastic Words that dominate Modern language and cognition and are dealt with at length in what follows.

I prefer to draw attention to words like “Scholar,” “Epistemology,” “Theology,” “Metaphysics, “Saint,” “the Church,” and a host of distinctive words with capitals as a sign of respect and an indication their special importance. In such cases, capitalization also indicates that something more is meant by the reference than would be ordinarily understood by normal—non-capitalized—English references. Thus, for example, we will speak in our discussion of Paradigms and Cognitive Frames of Evolution, Evolutionism, and evolution. Similarly, I use capitalization to indicate that certain words in the text are worthy of respect because they have a unique hierarchical ranking that puts them above other words or designates them for special usage, especially in a religious context such as the Magisterial Church, the Pope, the Clergy, and even words like “Pagans” and “Paganism.” This is also the case with regard to the Metaphysical usage of the One, the Good, Truth, Beauty, Essence, Being, Intellect, and similar words. 



 


 

Italics

I prefer to put Arabic, Latin, and other non-native English language words in Italics—such as the Arabic word Ḥadīth—but even including such common English expressions like per se, vis-a-vis, a Priori, and the German loan-word Weltanschauung (worldview), which many authors today would write without Italics on the grounds that they have been adequately assimilated into English. For me, such use of Italics is largely esthetic, but I also use it as a sign of respect for the foreign origins of such words, since Italics serve to identify such words as originally non-English, even though, in many cases—such as Sunna, Ḥadīth, and Fiṭra—they have now come to be extensively embodied in English texts as if they were indigenous. 



I also use Italics for special effects. Such usage is recommended when, for example—without the Italics—that intended emphasis would be lost: “How do we learn to think in terms of the whole?” Thus, again, with regard to the Prophet of the End of Time as presented in the Dead Sea Scrolls, I write: “Without exaggeration, this great Prophet of the End of Time was the key figure in the teachings of the Keepers of the Dead Sea Scrolls and constituted the central purpose of their Community.”

 



Quotations

In accord with standard United States usage, the default position in this work is to use double quotation marks throughout the text and restrict use of single quotation marks for quotations within quotations. As a rule, I introduce quotations with colons and not commas, unless such quotations occur spontaneously in the middle of sentence—without either colons or commas. 



On some occasions, quotation marks are used for single words or phrases to indicate some special meaning that they have been assigned. In this case, they are not direct quotations from other persons. At other times, however, when words are put in quotation marks, they mean that I am quoting others directly, who are either mentioned in the immediate text or—for some reason such as the imperative of brevity—are not mentioned because I felt it unnecessarily cumbersome or otherwise inappropriate to specify them. Of course, the main function of quotation marks is to indicate that the words enclosed are the verbatim words of someone else. Thus, I do not use quotation marks if I am paraphrasing or describing what someone else has said. 





Block Quotations

Block quotes are used in this work whenever a quotation runs longer than three lines or simply extends into the third line, if, for example, it is two and a half lines long. In order to separate them clearly from the main text, block quotations are given with justified margins and a slightly smaller font. They are specially indented and are not given quotation marks. The following is a typical block quotation of a report by a French diplomat regarding the intervention of al-Amīr ‘Abd-al-Qādir al-Jazā’irī to save the Christian Europeans from the rioting mobs of Damascus in 1267/1860:



We were in great distress, and all of us were quite convinced that our last hour had come. But in that same expectation of death—in those indescribable moments of anguish—Heaven sent us a savior! Abd el-Kader appeared, surrounded by his Algerians, around forty of them. He was on horseback and without arms. His handsome figure—calm and imposing—contrasted strangely with the noise and disorder that reigned everywhere around us.





Square Brackets

As indicated above, if I want to insert my own words in the middle of a translation or quotation, I generally put them in square brackets. As indicated above, this is sometimes necessary to make sense of a quotation that is out of context or contains an important ellipsis. To repeat, I use square brackets most commonly in translations of the Qur’ān and Ḥadīth, which use common modes of ellipsis that are implicitly understood in the original Arabic text but cannot be easily detected in literal English translations. Yet, they are necessary or helpful in context for the proper understanding of the original passage.



It is standard procedure, when taking some words out of a quotation, to employ an ellipsis of three dots to indicate that one or more words have been taken out. I often avoid this convention, however, especially when quoting Qur’ānic verses and Ḥadīth. Thus, I may often leave out such ellipsis marks—especially at the beginning or end of a quotation—because I find them unesthetic, unnecessary, and occasionally distracting. 





Numbers & Numerals

As regards numbering and numerals, all quantities are spelled out that are made up of one or two words, although I generally use numerals with them if they extend into the thousands, millions, or beyond. In such cases, the numerals are put in parentheses, directly after the spelled-out version. In these instances, numerals are added because they make reading the number easier. Spelling out numbers is, however, the book’s default position: as in, nine, one hundred, one thousand, fifty thousand, seven million, and so forth. In all such cases—even though the figure may be much larger than a thousand or a million—they are easily identified in spelled out form, and no particular benefit is provided by giving numerals. Numbers from one to one hundred, for example, are written out without giving their counterparts in Arabic numerals. But—as just indicated—Arabic numerals in parentheses may be used for larger enumerations after the spelled-out quantity: As in one hundred fifty-seven thousand, five hundred and fifty-six (157,556).





Assigning Historical Dates 

This book consistently uses the dating systems of both the Islamic and the Common Era, whenever the two overlap. This rule makes it easy for the reader-listeners—especially those who are Muslims—to place both dates accurately in the historical chronologies of the Islamic and non-Islamic worlds. When dates do not coincide, the book uses BCE (before the Common Era) for pre-Common Era dates and CE (Common Era) for dates falling within the first six centuries of the early Christian period prior to the rise of Islam.



It is the Western custom to date the Common Era beginning with the birth of Jesus Christ. In reality, however, the exact year of the nativity of Jesus Son of Mary is not certain. According to modern Scholars, Jesus was probably born either in the year 7 BCE, 6 BCE, or 4 BCE. Thus, the second solar-year millennium after the birth of Christ would actually have taken place sometime between the years 1413/1993 and 1416/1996, and not in 1420/2000, as is commonly presumed and when the dawn of the new millennium was so earnestly and often fearfully anticipated around the world.



The Christian West only began to date the Common Era from the time of the Christ’s birth during the sixth century CE, and that same dating system was only later accepted in the Christian East. Both customs, then, were adopted only a relatively short time before Muslims began to date their calendars from the time of the Prophet’s Hijra (Migration) from Mecca to Medina, which is the basis of the Islamic calendar. The Prophet Muḥammad’s Mission lasted about twenty-three lunar years, from thirteen years before the Hijra or 13 BH/610 until 11/632. Muslims call these pivotal years of universal Salvation History “the Age of Supreme Happiness” (‘Aṣr al-Sa‘āda). The Prophet Muḥammad was born on 22 April 571 CE, and his passing was at the age of sixty-three lunar years on Monday 12 Rabī’ al-Awwal 11/8 June 632. The Second Rightly Guided Caliph, ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, whose Caliphate began in the year 12/633 and lasted until 24/645, established the Islamic lunar calendar based upon the Prophet’s Hijra. He believed that Muslims should have a calendar of their own, not just because Islam constituted a new religious Dispensation, but also because it stood out as a new and revolutionary human Civilization and universal way of life. ‘Umar called the Companions of the Prophet together to give him counsel on the matter. Various Companions proposed basing the Muslim calendar on the Prophet’s birth, his death, or his reception of the first Qur’ānic Revelation. But the Caliph ‘Umar perceived that the seminal historical event in the Prophet’s Mission was his Hijra from Mecca to Medina, where Islam finally became free and was able to become the religious, socio-political, and cultural reality God had designed it to be. In The First Teaching, when the Islamic and Common Era overlap, the first century cited is the Islamic date according to Islam’s lunar calendar, while the second citation is to the Common Era (CE) solar date that overlaps with it. 



Throughout the footnotes of this work, it has been my habit to provide the death dates and some words of introduction in the footnotes regarding important figures when they are first mentioned in the book. This can be seen, for example, in the notes when I cite Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (d. 899/1494), the noted Islamic Scholar al-Imām Muḥammad ibn Ḥamdūn (d. 1273/1857), or the Australian bishop and social activist Ernest H. Burgmann (d. 1387/1967). I do not provide birth dates for those who have passed away, because final dates are generally adequate for identifying the general period in which they flourished, while dates of birth are often more difficult to establish. In the case of contemporaries, however, I cite only their dates of birth, which is meant to indicate that they are still living. In all such cases, I write out the word “born,” since the abbreviation “b.” is easily mistaken for “d.”, which is used for dates of death. Thus, for example, I follow this method in presenting Sister Mary Prudence Allen (born 1359/1940), al-Sayyid al-Shaykh Quṣayy Abū-al-Si‘d al-Ḥusaynī al-Rifā‘ī al-Shafi‘ī (born 1386/1967), and his somewhat older contemporary Grand Āyat-Allāh al-Sayyid Kamāl al-Ḥusaynī al-Ḥaydarī (born 1375/1956).





Chapter Titles, Divisions, & Subdivisions

Throughout The First Teaching, I have made extensive use of chapter titles, divisions, and multiple gradations of secondary subdivisions. I believe that breaking up the main text in this manner makes it easier to teach, read, review, study, and remember. Therefore, I regard this procedure as an important feature of the book’s layout and presentation. Sometimes, however, the texts that follow a title or sub-title may be very short, ranging from little more than a paragraph to only a page or two.





Note of Thanks

God says in the Qur’ān: “And as for the blessings of your Lord [upon you], proclaim [them gratefully]!” And the Prophet said: “Whoever does not give thanks to people, does not give thanks to God.” In the West, we say: “Many hands make light work.” I am both obliged and happy to express special thanks to all those who have been so generous in making this book possible—both those mentioned below and the many others who, for various reasons, are not mentioned. 

                                

First, I gladly express my genuine and lasting appreciation to the Oasis Initiative Foundation and its host of generous supporters and followers around the world for their unabated encouragement and support. I am especially thankful to the Oasis Board of Directors: Faisal Ghias, Noor Khan, Mansoor Panawala, Sana Syed, Zacharea Katerji, and my wife—as well as our diligent accountant Imam Khalīs Rashaad. In the particular case of Faisal Ghias, he has been immensely dependable in acquiring for me without delay dozens of books and articles and anything else needed—even when the materials were rare and difficult to find. His suggestions for organizing the book over the years have also proven immensely beneficial and critical to the compendium’s success.



The initial task of drafting would have been considerably more difficult without the diligent assistance of my student Sana Syed in her painstaking work of going through my earlier notes and writings on Divinity, while carefully separating the wheat from the chaff so that I could incorporate useful excerpts of them in my initial drafts. Similar thanks go to Oubai Kurdi, Sana Syed, Bassem Ghamian, Aziza Khalil, Sana Akhter, Nour Merza, Reehab Ramadan, and Seif Zeineldin for their pioneering labors upon the earliest rough drafts. the second stage of the drafting was finished with the help of Dr. Ray Lacina, Patrick Benson, Asiya Astrid Le Jeune, and Hisham Mahmoud. To Dr. Ray Lacina I also extend additional special thanks for invaluable help he gave me in research, especially on the archaeology of iron artifacts in Human history, as well as his continued editorial assistance at later stages of the book’s writing and editing.



As we prepared the book’s final drafts, I relied heavily upon the teamwork of Dr. Nadia Afzal, her husband Dr. Shehzad Malik, Nelly Elmenshawy, and Dr. Yasir Abunamous from Allentown, Pennsylvania. Dr. Shehzad Malik was also of tremendous help in explaining to me certain mathematical and henological implications in natural design. I also want to extend immense personal thanks to Dr. Naveed Khursheed Mallick, his wife Saadia Shah of Hyde Park in Chicago, and their family for graciously providing me with a special private library and retreat in their home for the purpose of preparing the book’s last drafts. In addition to this, Saadia Shah and her children have also been of great help in addressing certain important research and editorial questions.



I am grateful to Dr. Karim Lahham, Barrister-at-Law of the Inner Temple, London, for his encouragement and direction as well as his edits, comments, corrections, and additions—especially as concerns First Principles and the anatomy of learning. Likewise, I am thankful to Hasan Spiker, who is currently a Ph.D. student at Cambridge University in the Divinity Faculty, and who specializes in both the Islamic intellectual Tradition, ancient Greek philosophy, and Western thought from the Medieval until the modern period. I want also to thank Shaykh Dr. Walead Mosaad for his moral support and excellent scholarly, academic, and general advisory help. Likewise, I extend my gratitude to Shaykh Fouad Elgohari and Shaykh Jamaal Diwan, Religious Directors of the Majlis in Southern California, for their assistance.



I also extend gracious thanks to retired General Muhammad Yusaf Khan, Former Vice Chief of Staff of the Pakistani Army, for fruitful years of heartening encouragement and special assistance with Urdu poetry and other matters as needed. For his help with Persian poetry and translation, I extend special thanks to my dear friend Hameed Hakimi, who is working on his Ph.D. at Cambridge University in sociology and is a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council in Washington, D.C. and an associate fellow at Chatham House in London.



I am especially thankful to Dr. Amir Sufi, Bruce Lindsay Professor of Economics and Public Policy at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, for his tremendous encouragement and valuable assistance on a number of issues, especially the understanding of quantity and quality in modern economics and social sciences. I extend specific thanks to Imam Majid Mohamed Hagmagid of Washington, D.C. for his great help and useful advice. I am exceedingly appreciative of the great help given me by Ihsan al-Kittani Khalife of Southern California, especially with regard to the intricacies of the geography of the Holy Land and Greater Syria. Likewise, I extend sincere acknowledgements of thanks to Kevin Austin Butts, Ph.D. candidate in Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations at Yale University, for his generous help with Thamūdic, Pharaonic Egyptian, and certain other aspects of bibliographical research. 





                                                              Image 1:



















                                                                Small Garland of Many Thanks





Table of Contents





List of Images

Most of the images in Speaking the Truth with Love were carefully picked and laboriously explained by the author and editors because they believed them to be symbolically relevant to the book’s text and context. In presenting these depictions, however, I felt it more appropriate to refer to the images themselves symbolically and let them speak for themselves in illuminating their context within the book.



Image 1: Small Garland of Many Thanks.



Image 2: Al-Sayyid ‘Abd-al-Shakūr, compliments of Ithar Abusheikha.



Image 3: “Wonder is the beginning of wisdom.” (Socrates). (Greek: Diá tò thaumázein hē sophía, Διά τὸ θαυμάζειν ἡ σοφία.)



Image 4: The testimony of faith in Arabic calligraphy.



Image 5: Sunflower image: “For the earth is the Lord’s and all the fullness it contains” (1 Corinthians, 10:26; cf. Psalm, 24:1).



Image 6: Al-‘Umrān—true Civilization—brings the Environment to life.



Image 7: The lighthouse: “Let there be light (Fīat lūx).” (Genesis, 1:3).



Image 8: The Milky Way: “Seek Him who makes the seven stars and Orion and turns the shadow of death into the morning and makes the day dark with night, who calls for the waters of the sea and pours them out upon the face of the earth: The Lord is His name. (Amos, 5:8).



Image 9: The outgoing tide: Within each religious dispensation, history is a constant ebb and flow between Truth and falsehood.



Image 10: The Hudhud (Hoopoe): “To Man and to each thing He created, God has given a unique primordial Nature (Fiṭra), but Man is Heaven’s Masterpiece.”



Image 11: Forest walkway: The Sharī‘a is a Divine Pathway that leads to life-giving water.



Image 12: Al-Ludd (English: Lod; Hebrew: Lôdh; Greek: Lýdda; Λύδδα) in present-day Israel, where the Messiah Jesus Christ, after his Second Coming, will pursue and overtake the Antichrist, who will melt like salt in water at the sight of Christ, who will finally killing him there with a lance.



Image 13: Cornell University overlooking Cayuga Lake Valley: “But the unexamined life is not worth having any man live it.” (Socrates) (Greek: ho dè ánexétastos bíos oú biōtòs anthrṓpōi; ὁ δὲ ἀνεξέταστος βίος οὐ βιωτὸς ἀνθρώπῳ).



Image 14: Japanese Bonsai Tree: The Bonsai Tree is a miniature work of ancient Japanese cultural art. Bonsai Human Beings are a failure of Modern civilization.



Image 15: Ice halo over mountains: “The expressions [of the People of God] are the sustenance of the family of the listeners (al-ibāra: qūt li-‘ā’ilat al-mustami‘īn). (Ibn ‘Aṭā’-Allāh).



Image 16: Waterfall in the mountains: Functional Certitude (al-Yaqīn al-Wāqi‘ī) must be the first premise of a sound Teacher-Student fellowship.



Image 17: Rainbow Mountains of China: Our eyes are the windows of our Souls. Like the voice of the Sea, Nature’s beauty speaks directly to our Hearts: “Yet mountains are the beginning and the end of all natural scenery.” (John Ruskin).



Image 18: Lake McDonald: Given its inherent “Cultural Imperative,” Islam traditionally took on the mosaic richness of the indigenous cultures it encountered, like the clear life-giving waters of a lake faithfully reflect the colors of the bedrock beneath them.



Image 19: Turkish mountain side monastery: “A house divided against itself cannot stand” (Mark, 3:25)



Image 20: The swans: “Great minds think alike.” (Aristotle), and great men do not live in vain.



Image 21: Mountain river in Xinjiang: “All the rivers run into the sea, but the sea is never filled. (Ecclesiastes, 1:7).



Image 22: Mountains overlooking the lake: “Beauty is the splendor of Truth.” (Plato) (Greek: Kállos eínai ē lamprótēta tēs Alētheías, Κάλλος είναι η λαμπρότητα της Αληθείας; Latin: Pulchritūdō vēritātis splendor).



Unused Quotations:



Time is a river. Put this as Time is a River. You cannot put your foot in the same river twice. You cannot bathe in the same river twice. You can’t step into the same river twice. (Heraclitus). “No man ever steps in the same river twice”. The current translation I have is “Κανένας άνθρωπος δεν περπατά ποτέ στο ίδιο ποτάμι δύο φορές”. It is not the same river, and he is not the same man. Some translate this more metaphorically as “You cannot bathe in the same river twice.”



No mention shall be made of coral or of pearls. For the price of wisdom is above rubies. (Job, 28:18). ADD: Wisdom is the principal thing. Therefore, get wisdom, and with all your getting, get understanding. (Proverbs, 4:7). ADD: Prove all things. Hold fast to what is good. (1 Thessalonians, 5:21).





Maybe put this with the image of the butterfly: To see the World in a grain of sand,/And a Heaven in a wild flower,/Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand,/ And Eternity in an hour. (William Blake).



A good heart is the sun and the moon. Use possibly with the image of Prague.



Great things are done when Men and Mountains meet. (William Blake). NOTE: This could be the two water falls with the bridge: And even greater things happen when Men meet who are Mountains. You might add this to the caption on the Teacher-Student relation.



Time is a great healer. (This may fit in Occidentalism and taking a new vision of Islam and the West.) ADD: Time heals what reason cannot. (Seneca, d. 65 CE). Or “Only time can heal what reason cannot.” Ο χρόνος θεραπεύει ό,τι η λογική δεν μπορεί.



Still waters run deep.



Man is a history-making creature who can neither repeat his past nor leave it behind. (W. H. Auden). This goes well with Occidentalism and the book’s focus on history. 

Moreover, to be ignorant of what happened before you were born is to remain always a child (Latin: Nescīre autem quid ante quam nātus sīs acciderit, id est semper esse puerum. (Cicero). To be ignorant of the past is to remain a child forever.





Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with all your strength. For there is no work, no planning, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave where you are going (Ecclesiastes, 9:10). 



With regard to the value of the wisdom that the book seeks to teach: The Bible says: “No mention shall be made of coral or of pearls. For the price of wisdom is above [the price of] rubies” (Job, 28:18). In like manner it states: “Wisdom is the principal thing. Therefore, get wisdom, and with all your getting, get understanding [of it]” (Proverbs, 4:7).



The supreme reality of our time is the vulnerability of the planet. This could be added after the image on ‘Umran.



William Blake advised the people of the heart: 

To see the World in a grain of sand,

And a Heaven in a wild flower,

Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand,

And Eternity in an hour. 



Great things are done when Men and Mountains meet. (William Blake). NOTE: This could be the two water falls with the bridge: And even greater things happen when Men meet who are Mountains.



This is very appropriate for the proofs of God’s Self-Necessity: William Blake said: “If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to Man as it is: Infinite.”



A good book is the purest essence of a human soul. (Thomas Carlyle, d. 1881). Possibly with Speaking the Truth with Love.



As idle as a painted ship/ Upon a painted ocean. (Samuel Taylor Colderidge). I am not sure where to put this. But it is a beautiful quotation.



Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you ought to answer every man. (Colossians, 4:6). Put with Speaking the Truth with love section. 



Let all things be done in a fitting way and good order. (1 Corinthians, 14:40).



Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with all your strength. For there is no work, no planning, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave where you are going. (Ecclesiastes, 9:10). 



Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well. (Philip Chesterfield, d. 1773).



We are stripped bare by the curse of plenty. (William Churchill, d. 1965s).



To everything there is a season and a time for every purpose under heaven. (Ecclesiastes, 3:1).



Hypocrisy is the homage paid by vice to virtue. (François Duc de la Rochefoucauld, d. 1680).



A proverb is much meaning decorated by few words.



A proverb is one Man’s wit and all Men’s wisdom. A proverb is one Man’s insight but all Men’s wisdom.



























































































































بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم

وصلى الله على سيدنا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه وسلم

In the name of God, the All-Merciful, the Ever-Merciful.

God extol our noble Master, Muḥammad, his Intimate Associates, and his Companions, encompassing them in perfect peace.









First Teaching of the Last Message:

The Divine Science & Its Six Pillars







Umar F. Abd-Allah Wymann-Landgraf











Volume One:

Speaking the Truth with Love













































Dedication





I dedicate this work to



Al-Sayyid al-Sharīf al-Shaykh al-Rabbānī

‘Abd-al-Shakūr ibn Ibrāhīm ibn Yūsuf ibn ‘Abd-al-Salām ibn Zayn-al-‘Ābidīn 

al-Ḥasanī al-Jīlānī al-Qādirī (1244/1829-1404/1984)









                                               Image 2:































                                   Al-Sayyid ‘Abd-al-Shakūr























Jesus said: “And you shall know the truth, and the truth will set you free” (John, 8:32).

ܘܬܹܕܥܘܿܢ ܫܪܿܪܿܐ ܘܣ݂ܘ ܫܪܿܪܿܐ ܢܚ݂ܿܪܼܪܟܘܿܢ

ותדעון שׁררא והו שׁררא נחררכון

(wa tedh‘ōn shārārā wa hū shārārā neḥararkhōn)

Καί γνώσεσθε τήν άλήθειαν, καί ή άλήθεια έλευθερώσει ύμας

(Kaí gnósesthe tên álêtheian, kaí hê álêtheia éleutherôsei hýmas)

Et cognōscētis vēritātem et vēritās vōs līberābit





                                          Image 3:























                                                    Wonder is the beginning of wisdom.







Book Profile & Scope

Speaking the Truth with Love is the introductory volume of First Teaching of the Last Message: The Divine Science and Its Six Pillars. The work is meant to be a reliable, wide-ranging, and in-depth reference for the six foundational Pillars (Arkān) of Islam’s universal and timeless Prophetic Message. It also branches out under the canopy of those pillars to include many of the vast implications they affirm regarding the structure of reality in the world around us and our sound cognition of it. Given its scope, the compendium’s subject matter is designed to explain in the fullest possible sense the fathomless meanings—explicit and implicit—in Islam’s two-part Prophetic testimony of faith. All such ramifications of Islām—inwardly and outwardly—are included in its two-fold Creedal witness: 



Lā ilāha ill-Allāh 

There is no god but God

Muḥammadun Rasūlu-Llāh

Muḥammad is God’s Messenger

































Image 4:

























      Islamic Testimony of Faith in Arabic calligraphy





In Arabic, the word Islām refers to the act of freely rendering submissive obedience to God. But the obedient disposition of islām is not exclusive to Human Beings. Rather, islām is a distinctive hallmark in all of God’s creation—from the winding galaxies, stars, and planets above, to the fishes of the sea, the birds of the air, and all other plants and animals on earth as well as the microorganisms and even minerals and other inorganic substances we know as well as the atoms and molecules that make them up—all of which are muslim, glorifying God in their unique ways and existing in complete submission to His Infinite Knowledge, Perfect Wisdom, and Eternal Will.



As a historical Dispensation, Islam stands in direct continuity with all earlier Prophetic religion—whether pre-Biblical, Biblical, or extra-Biblical—and it must be emphasized in this regard that the imperative of volitional submission to the Divine, which lies at the core of islām, perfectly epitomizes the ancient concept of Prophetic Religion in all earlier Revelatory Traditions. Biblical Scripture asserts: “Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Revere God and keep His Commandments. For this is the whole duty of Man” (Ecclesiastes, 12:13). Thus, islām—even in the Biblical worldview—constitutes “the conclusion of the whole matter,” which in Gospel Christianity calls to mind “That Old-Time Religion,” which Christian Protestants have long counted among their joyous Jubilee Songs. In a similar vein, the Biblical Book of Proverbs stresses: “Where there is no [Revelatory] Vision, the people perish. But blessed be the one who heeds the instruction of [Sacred] Wisdom” (Proverbs, 29:18). This quest for the treasures of God’s primordial religion, authentic Revelatory Vision, and Sacred Wisdom runs like a golden thread through the entire weft of The First Teaching.



The six Buttresses of Prophetic credence as established by Islam’s two-part testimony of faith are belief in:



God

The Angels

The Revealed Books

The Prophet-Messengers

The Resurrection, Last Judgment, & Hereafter

Providence & the Foreordination of all things, including Good and Evil.



The field of study that articulates these foundations, their full implications, and other corollaries of Islam’s two-part Prophetic declaration of faith is called both the Divine Science (al-‘Ilm al-Ilāhī) and the Highest Science (al-‘Ilm al-A‘lā). As we will see in what follows, this thorough-going study in Islam of Divinity, Prophecy, the Seen, and the Unseen constitutes a universal Metaphysical and historical discipline, which may be defined as: “The Science of what is as it [truly] is, according to the rubric of Islam (Al-‘Ilm bi-al-mawjūd bi-mā huwa mawjūd ‘alā qanūn al-Islām).” This explication of the Divine Science, which has been adopted in The First Teaching and is explained further in this and later volumes, is virtually identical to the Science of Metaphysics as defined by Aristotle and Ibn Sīnā (Latin: Avicenna), but with the all-important difference of establishing Islamic Revelation as the basic standard and ultimate criterion for all sound Metaphysical and speculative discourse about God and ultimate realities.                      

                                    

First and foremost, the Divine or Highest Science bears the burden of delineating and explaining the Creedal fundamentals of Orthodox Islamic belief. This primary function of Divinity in Creedal matters sets forth all obligatory Doctrines, which all Muslims are required to affirm. By its nature, Creedal belief in Islam is relatively straightforward, although its instructional demands vary among individuals according to their cultures, backgrounds, and personal needs. Such Creedal and Doctrinal obligations—as will be clarified in what follows—pertain exclusively to those tenets of the Prophetic teaching which—beyond any shade of doubt—are clearly and unambiguously articulated and established as literally true in Islam’s Revealed and Scholarly sources—the Qur’ān, the Sunna, and Consensus (al-Ijmā‘)—in conformity with the exacting standards of semantic clarity laid down by the dictates of Islam’s Epistemology of Certainty (Uṣūl al-Qaṭ‘ wa al-Ẓann).

                         Image 5: 























“Seek Him who makes the seven stars and Orion and turns the shadow of death into the morning and makes the day dark with night, who calls for the waters of the sea and pours them out upon the face of the earth: The Lord is His name.”



By their nature, Creedal beliefs are basic, uncomplicated, and generally straight forward such as belief in God’s Oneness, the Angels, Divine Revelation, the continuity of Prophecy, the finality of the Prophet Muḥammad, the physical Resurrection of the dead, the Last Judgment, the Garden and the Fire, and so forth.



But it must be emphasized that the vast scope of the Divine Science only begins and certainly does not end with fundamental Creedal teachings. Given its all-embracing Metaphysical nature, the Divine Science is rightly acclaimed as the Highest of all Sciences (al-‘Ilm al-A‘lā) because—in conjunction with its exposition of the Divine, the preeminent and most noble of all teachings—it attends to countless other Epistemological and existential questions as well as the Moral and Intellectual challenges that arise in each generation. 





                   





Homō Religiōsus—“Man the Believer”—requires, as we will illustrate in Volume Ten, sound and meaningful answers to all his existentialist and religious queries and questionings, especially the chief issues that perplex him and preoccupy his consciousness from time to time. Homō Religiōsus demands that his doubts be replaced with certainties so that he can make sense of himself, his faith, and Humanity in the context of his times. In this regard, it is the duty of Divinity—as “The Science of what is as it [truly] is, according to the rubric of Islam (Al-‘Ilm bi-al-mawjūd bi-mā huwa mawjūd ‘alā qanūn al-Islām)”—to respond as effectively as possible to Homō Religiōsus and the primary questions and burning controversies of each era, seeking effectively to engage, examine, and respond to the dominant convictions, doubts, and reigning Paradigms—flawed and unflawed— Truths and fallacies of the age for Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Thus, at the present time, the Highest Science must respond intelligently and convincingly to questions about the Environment, Evolution, nationalism, racism, the nature of Cognition, our ability to discern the Truth, the foundations of the Moral Order, and an extensive range of other matters that go far beyond basic Creedal Doctrine. 







                                         Image 6:























“For the earth is the Lord’s and all the fullness it contains.”





Thus, it should be clear that, in today’s context, this broad second category takes in all faith-related matters—big and small, essential and non-essential—that concern not just the entire World Community of Islam (al-Umma) but present-day Humanity as a whole. Again, only rarely does such vast content come directly under the specific obligations of the Islamic Creed and obligatory Doctrine as such. Moreover, in accord with the Epistemology of Certainty, the conclusions pertaining to this second dimension of religious belief are necessarily allowed to contain diverse elements of speculation and conjecture that are not specifically set forth in Islam’s Revelatory sources. Therefore, such findings are essentially sound guidelines, but they do not constitute rigorously required beliefs for each and every Muslim, nor should any disagreements about them ever justify religious controversy or division among the Believers—as will be fully clarified in our discussion of the Epistemology of Certainty in Volume Six.



Given its scope, The First Teaching is attentively fixed on this second, far-ranging, and all-inclusive perspective of Islamic belief, and that focus accounts for the compendium’s great detail and substantial length, which go far beyond Islam’s basic Creedal and Doctrinal demands. Thus, the majority of what is written in this book falls under the broad heading of such overreaching needs and interests that are essential to any healthy contemporary society, culture, and Civilization (al-‘Umrān). As a rule, however, all matters of personal Creedal and Doctrinal obligation are explicitly indicated as such throughout the work. Thus, by default, any matter that is not specifically identified as a Creedal requirement may be assumed to fall within the much broader domain of non-Creedal beliefs and speculations. 







                           Image 7:

          

















Al-‘Umrān—true Civilization—suits the Environment and brings it back to life.





In Volume Six, we will discuss the Islamic principle of Moral Agency (al-Taklīf) as set forth in the Sharī‘a, the Prophetic Dispensation and Code of Life.  As will be noted in that treatment, religious duties in Islam are fall into two major categories: 1. Individual Obligations (Furūḍ al-‘Ayn) and 2. Societal Obligations (Furūḍ al-Kifāya). Learning and adequately mastering the Creedal requirements of Islam as well as its fundamental practices constitute an Individual Obligation of the first order, binding upon every Muslim man and woman of sound mind and body. To elaborate and teach the Creed is, however, a Societal Obligation, and it is something that the Muslim Community generally succeeds in fulfilling adequately well. As regards answering the much broader questions of faith that go beyond Creedal matters—these so-called “burning questions of our time,” as stated above—this is a Societal Obligation required of the Muslim Community as a whole and falling squarely upon the shoulders of the entire World Community of Islam (al-Umma). The onus for meeting this formidable and on-going Intellectual challenge must be borne by an adequate number of qualified Muslims Scholars—who must correctly answer the relevant faith-related questions of any given generation. It is the desire of The First Teaching to join hands with other Muslim Scholars in our time in seeking to answer cogently these broad questions and helping to recover sound Metaphysical understanding and Intellectual integrity in our time.



                         Image 8:





















                         The Sharī‘a is a Divine Pathway & Prophetic Code of Life Leading to Life-Giving Waters





Although Islam’s six Pillars are the principal focus of this compendium, they are actually not fully presented until much later in Volumes Eleven through Sixteen and finally Volume Eighteen. They are preceded in the earlier volumes and interlinked in Volume Seventeen by other discussions—historical, Epistemological, Philosophical, Eschatological, and otherwise—that cultivate the ground for effective discussion of the Pillars, while also rounding them off in Volume Seventeen with other essential Prophetic teachings—such as Sainthood, Sufism, and the Signs of the End of Time. All volumes of The First Teaching and the important facts presented in the work as well as its dominant Paradigms and Cognitive Frames are summarized in the Syntopicon and Teaching Gloss at the end of this volume. Thus, there is no need to discuss in detail the book’s extensive chapter content at this point. 



Image 9:

















Diligence Is Richly Supplied. 



             

Book Title in Perspective

I called this book First Teaching of the Last Message to reflect the fact that, in Islam, seeking sound Creedal and Doctrinal foundations and getting reliable anchorage in Epistemology and Divinity constitute the first and foremost religious Individual Obligation (Farḍ ‘Ayn) for every Muslim of legal age and having basic moral competence (being “mukallaf”). Thus, such matters rightfully constitute “a first teaching” in terms of their pedagogical priority. But, as noted earlier, this individual duty is complemented and, in many ways, vastly superseded by the immense Communal Obligation (Farḍ Kifāya) that Muslims bear as a World Community to galvanize their system of Islamic belief in its fullest sense so that it may correctly and effectively address all of the critical questions of our time. Although not an Individual Obligation in itself, this broader dimension of the Divine Science is clearly a Communal Muslim duty of the first order. Thus, the subject matter of the book as a First Teaching seeks to deal with these first most fundamental priorities of Islam and their cultural amplifications at both the levels of Individual and Societal Obligations. 



As such an initial teaching, the book’s title also implies that appropriate second, third, fourth, and other ordinal studies should follow. According to the dictates of Islamic pedagogy, a Second Teaching, for example, would focus upon the Prophetic Way of Life (al-Sharī‘a), concentrating on Individual Obligations (Furūḍ al-‘Ayn) primarily, while introducing and bringing to light all fundamental and secondary Communal Obligations (Furūḍ Kifāya) that are required—not of each individual Muslim—but of the Islamic World Community as a whole. While The First Teaching seeks to set forth the primary obligations of Muslims regarding Divinity and the fullest definition of reality as it truly is, The Second Teaching would seek to develop competence in such basic personal responsibilities and understandings that make up the ways of a righteous life that Believers seek to live both as individuals and Communities. Further third, fourth, and other teachings would include topics such as the principles of Morality and Ethics, good character, the Science of the purification of the heart, the elucidation of the Spiritual Path, Prophetic biography, the lives of the Companions, Islamic and world history, as well as much broader and more detailed empirical treatments of Occidentalism.



In Islam—which is the Prophetic Path—mastering the basic fundamentals of the Divine Science (al-‘Ilm al-Ilāhī) and then the personal parameters of the Law are not only first and second-order imperatives, they are also the essential first two steps for Islamic Spirituality. Thus, any attempts to follow an authentic and ultimately successful Path towards authentic experiential Knowledge of God (al-Ma‘rifa) cannot happen without sound Creedal foundations and adequate grounding in the Prophetic Code. Without them, no authentic inward journey is possible, even if—for an entire lifetime—the Believer has the best intentions, worships intensely, and seeks earnestly to discover himself and the secrets of sincere Spirituality.



Image 10: 







	









“No mention shall be made of coral or of pearls. For the price of wisdom is above rubies.” 



The title’s reference to “the Last Message” reflects the Islamic belief in the finality of the Prophecy of the Prophet Muḥammad and the conviction that no Divine Messenger will come after him. This Doctrine is an essential part of the content of the Islamic Creed, which is affirmed by the Qur’an, Sunna, and the Scholarly Consensus (al-Ijmā‘) of the Community. In Islamic belief, the Prophet Muḥammad was the Prophet of the End of Days and the Seal of all God’s tens of thousands of Prophets and Messengers who came to Humanity during the millennia before him and prior to the return of Jesus Christ at the end of the world. The finality of the Prophet’s Messengerhood does not conflict with the Second Coming of the Messiah Jesus Son of the Virgin Mary—which is also an obligatory Islamic Creedal belief and is examined more fully in Volumes Two and Fifteen. For the Second Coming constitutes the return of a former Prophet-Messenger, Jesus Christ, not the sending of a new one. This fact is indicated by the adjective “second,” since Jesus—as is well known and universally acknowledged by those who believe in him—came a first and initial time over two thousand years ago. In Islamic belief, the Messiah Jesus Son of Mary will return at the end of the present world-order—not as a new Prophet or to establish an alternative religious Dispensation, but to correct the errors of the historical Church and Rabbinic Judaism, while vindicating the teaching of his Brother and Advocate, the Prophet Muḥammad, God’s Paraclete, whose teaching authentically represents and effectively defends the Messiah’s own original Message prior to its historical distortion in later centuries. Upon his return, Jesus, the Messiah, will successfully champion the upright Muslims of that final generation in Humanity’s ultimate, victorious struggle against the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl). All of these beliefs are fundamental Eschatological teachings. They are more fully discussed in Volume Seventeen and constitute obligatory articles of Islamic Creed and Doctrine.



                           Image 11:

























                           The Humble Modern-Day Village of Lod, Where the Antichrist Meets His End.



Regarding Sources of Truth & Cognition

The First Teaching is fundamentally concerned with Truth, although it seeks to speak it consistently with love, as we will propose in what follows. In this context, it is useful to introduce how the Islamic Scholarly Tradition looked upon the sources of Truth and cognition as well as the acquisition, cultivation, and application of knowledge, especially since The First Teaching aspires to be a meaningful adjunct to that Tradition.



First and above all, Human knowledge belongs supremely and exclusively to God alone, and—as it is said—there is no patent on the sun or the moon. Just as God fashioned the sun, the moon, and the entire universe, it is He alone who creates and owns the ideas of Human Beings—and people “receive” and “acquire” them from Him.

Image 12:



















Who can patent the sun and the moon?



In this process, God imparts knowledge and understanding to whomever He wills, and only He wills to allow thinkers to gather that knowledge together, synthesize, and comprehend it. God says in the Qur’ān: “And they encompass nothing of His knowledge but as He wills.” (The Cow, 2:255). 



Thus, knowledge is always “Divinely created” and “Divinely given,” which—as we will see in our discussion of causation, Foreordination, and Free Will in Volume Eleven—is only “acquired” by Human beings under the auspices of their individual freedom to act. Thus, strictly speaking, Human knowledge is always a Divine Creation is never a personal or social cognitive construct. We are “given” what we know—however unique or great—and we do not “create” it. It begins and ends with God, not with the subjective human consciousness. At the same time, however, errors may be rightly attributed to individuals, although, those shortcomings and faults too are created by God and then “acquired” by the agency those very same Human Beings who make them. Great thinkers, however, are receptors of God-given ideas, not the inventors of them.



Moreover, Traditionally in the Islamic world, Muslims were grateful to Scholars who synthesized and expressed the Truth for them cogently, even when those learned authorities presented their material without citing their sources, which was a common custom in the Traditional Islamic World. For, in the pre-Modern past, Muslims did not entertain the illusion that any Human authors had actually “created” the knowledge they presented, much less that they “owned” it or, in Modern parlance, were justified in “copyrighting” it. Again, knowledge was seen as a Divine Light that is uncovered in the human heart as a gift directly from God to those who have the receptivity to learn and communicate it. 



                                Image 13: 























                               “Let there be light.”



In the process of learning, writing, and teaching, new and distinct worlds present themselves to us, and there is an intrinsically isomorphic relation between the cognitive apparatus God has given us as individuals and the universe of thoughts, concepts, and knowledge that they disclose. Thus, knowledge by its nature is highly reactive, interactive, and affective (infi’ālī), corresponding to the inner geography of each person’s heart and their Intellectual and Spiritual life. As a consequence, the reception and transmission of knowledge and wisdom are always a process of personal illumination in the attempt to bring light to others as well. 



Speaking of Truth and its sources, in all previous works, I provided meticulously thorough footnotes for all my primary and secondary sources. At the beginning, I followed the same approach in The First Teaching but finally decided it would defeat the work’s purpose by making its already exceedingly lengthy text unnecessarily erudite and immensely too long. As is readily clear from a brief survey of the text, however, The First Teaching does contain copious and exhaustive footnotes, which are complemented by an extensive Bibliography in the last volume, which lists the important references upon which I have relied in my research and writing. As a rule—as noted above—the compendium’s footnotes are designed to support the main text by providing a sort of running commentary with detailed additional information which the ordinary reader, listener, or reader-listener may not be fully familiar with and without which the book’s pedagogical purpose would not be achieved. Although it is hardly elementary, The First Teaching is not technically an academic book. Rather, it was written as a detailed teaching manual, and it is an accepted norm today that minimal citation of primary and secondary sources is both acceptable and appropriate in such works.



T. S. Eliot famously remarked: “Bad poets borrow; good poets steal.”* Anatole France insisted: “When a thing is well-said, take it, copy it, and have no scruples.” Similarly, Voltaire unapologetically asserted: 



Originality is nothing but judicious imitation. The most original writers borrowed one from another. The instruction we find in books is like the fire [we cook with]. We fetch it from our neighbors, kindle it at home, share it with others, and it becomes the property of all.



It is also said: “Never make a defense before you stand accused.” Yet, without seeking to vindicate the method I have chosen in this writing this book by relying upon minimal citation of sources, I would like to emphasize that I have been diligent in The First Teaching to avoid stealing, which my nature finds intensely repugnant. Yet, although my sources have generally been reworked over the years into my own style, wording, and thought, the content of my writing sometimes consciously or unconsciously reflects parallels with my references or other sources similar to them. In many ways, this is unsurprising and natural. Still: “Borrowed garments never fit well.” For this reason, it is my earnest aspiration and deep conviction that any “garments” displayed in The First Teaching will be shown to fit well, since, in fact, they are not “borrowed” after all but have been properly tailored, appropriated, and adopted over a lifetime of study. Consequently, whatever their original sources, they have become incorporated into my own memory and consciousness as well as the book’s distinctive cognitive universe, making them count in their own right as “original” and as the book’s proper internal embellishments, even when they may still distinctly echo their sources.





Image 14:





















To see the World in a grain of sand

                                                                 And a Heaven in a wild flower,

                                                                 Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand,

                                                                 And Eternity in an hour



It is my hope that The First Teaching will bring such mutual illumination to the reader-listener, and, as we set out together on this knowledge journey in the quest for greater enlightenment, I invoke the words of the Prophet: “Our Lord, show us the truth as truth and provide us the means to follow it, and show us falsehood as falsehood and provide us the means to put it aside.” As far as I am concerned, if only a single reader, listener, or reader-listener should benefit from this work, it will be enough. The great Sunnī Muslim Persian poet Farīd-al-Dīn ‘Aṭṭār states: 




Know for certain that all these wonders were set forth [by God]

Only for the sake of a single seeing heart.

Yaqīn meydān keh chandīnī ‘ajāyeb

Barāye yak dil-e dānā nehādīm.







Speaking the Truth with Love

Socrates said, “The unexamined life is not worth living.” It is the purpose of The First Teaching to empower each reader, listener, and reader-listener to examine their lives realistically and fill them with meaning: Why are we what we are? What is our purpose in this life?  Why is anything what it is? Why are things the way they are? Why is there Evil? And why is there Good? In the process of answering such fundamental existential questions, The First Teaching seeks to disclose the roots of true “Identity” for a generation that loves to invoke that term but is often confused about what it means and who and what they are as well as what they and the world are meant to be.



     Image 15:















   “The unexamined life is not worth living.”





As accountable Human Beings, it is our obligation to make ourselves and the world around us intelligible. We must be able to explain who we are, why life is as it is, and what the world is meant to be. Paradoxically, we live in an age, which—despite its remarkable material progress and its amalgamation of massive wealth for a few—has left aside and, in some cases, even abandoned all that is essential for Humanity to understand itself, comprehend objective reality, or discern anything that has a worthy purpose in life. As the American ethnologist William Churchill perceptively declared in the early fourteenth/twentieth century: “We are stripped bare by the curse of plenty.” Moreover, despite our ubiquitous bastions of advanced learning and applied Science, we seem to have become utterly oblivious to the need of furnishing sound explanations for anything, while the supreme reality of our time has become the vulnerability of the planet, something unimaginable only a short time ago. Reliable knowledge, on the other hand, makes sense of information. By establishing a foothold in reality, true knowledge transforms the human soul and moves it to beneficial action, making it fully Human and, consequently, fully Humane and beautifully beneficent. 



In the quest for trustworthy knowledge, The First Teaching is dedicated to speaking the truth plainly and unapologetically, while setting forth the distinction between what is real and meaningful and what is not. But, in this pursuit for clarity and meaning, the book seeks to abide by the New Testament wisdom: “Speak the truth with love” (álētheúein én ágápē; άληθεύειν έν άγάπη) (Ephesians, 4:15). Still, in seeking to speak the truth with love, this work will likely offend some reader-listeners—Muslims, Jews, Christians, and others. But hopefully all such matters of ill-feeling and contention will prove to be issues of profound and lasting relevance for all, such that they simply cannot be sidestepped and need to be set forth in open and made the object of honest dialogue. As the Latin proverb states: “Ad astra per aspera” (Through adversity, [we will] reach the stars).



Image 16: 



















“A good book is the purest essence of a human soul.”



New Testament wisdom counsels: “Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you ought to answer every man” (Colossians, 4:6). It also advises: “Let all things be done in a fitting way and good order” (1 Corinthians, 14:40), which pertains to writing as much as anything else. Honest discourse is essential to Civilization and our shared Humanity, and we must always strive to build bridges and speak with each other empathetically, rationally, and in a spirit of forgiveness—Muslim, Jew, Christian, and others—as if we were one family. Still, as the proverb asserts: “Truth fears no trial.” And as Chief Justice Charles Evan Hughes contended: “When we lose the right to be different, we lose the privilege to be free.” His words clearly echo Euripedes, who said: “Not to speak one’s thoughts is slavery.” 



Thus, freedom comes with responsibility, including the prerogative of being different and expressing controversial opinions—with or without love. It is only in the context of such freedom of expression and open discourse that we can hope to discover each other, confront our problems honestly, and gain the understanding necessary to live peacefully in today’s world, while dealing effectively with its challenges.



Image 17:





















Diversity is a beautiful flower that blooms with greater brightness each time it is freshly pollinated. 



As just emphasized, speaking the Truth is an act of liberation. Again, such honesty should be clear and unapologetic but, hopefully, done in the spirit of warmth, love, and empathy, which is one of the book’s main benchmarks. In this vein, al-Shaykh ‘Alī al-Yashruṭī taught that empathy is a type of cognition, producing its own special types of knowledge. Such empathy-based knowledge, he taught, is implanted in the service of the Other (al-khidma), which must be rooted in love (al-maḥabba) and spiritual discipline (ta’dīb). The First Teaching firmly and fully endorses the imperative of empathy, holding that one of the many blessings of empathy is to lighten the burden of speaking the truth with love, by opening up the channels of honest, calm, and Humane dialogue among people on the basis of mutual respect—despite diverse backgrounds, outlooks, and purposes. Thus, The First Teaching advocates a process of self-discovery and positive interchange with the Other based on empathy and love, which does not stop short with authentic documentation and demonstrative proof alone—as sound and necessary as they may be. For without warm-heartedness, mere information and reasoning—even when free of disinformation and schemes of manipulation—cannot lead to true understanding and is unlikely ever to be anything more than short-lived and superficial. 



Mutual estrangement and alienation among Human Beings blinds us to the good of the Other, but it must be emphatically added that such incomprehension of the Other is also unnatural. Wholesome people who are true to their natures innately seek to overcome barriers between themselves and others and discover their fellow Human Beings as they truly are. We cannot hope to attain understanding of the Other or find spiritual balance within ourselves unless we give to all groups the same respect that we expect from them. Throughout history, ignorance of the Other has bred fear, hatred, and belligerence. It has also spawned hosts of intellectual and cultural “allergies” that instill within us false impressions of the Other that make it impossible for us to carry on meaningful exchanges, much less live in peace and understanding. A well-known Islamic aphorism states: “We hate what we do not know” (man jahila shay’an ‘adāhu: literally, “whoever is ignorant of a thing becomes hostile toward it”). We must have the courage to replace such ignorance of the Other—whoever that Other may be—with the earnest quest of sound knowledge of them, which requires us to look at ourselves and the world around us in novel ways. For we cannot do justice to Human reality without being able to absorb as fully as possible the entire range of new concepts that open us up to Others as they truly are and as they see themselves. Moreover, as the Islamic Tradition emphasizes, no Man of Intellect is ever content to have a single enemy, and the restoration of such sound Intellect and the removal of enmities must be counted among the highest purposes of any time, especially our own.



Having edification as its aim, The First Teaching seeks not to denounce, but to explain. For it is more useful to clarify errors than to condemn them. Thus, for example, although the book undertakes various critiques of Modernism and its ideologies, the work does not seek to castigate or vilify them, nor does it lament Humanity’s present plight. Rather, it seeks to understand our present situation—for better and for worse—so that we may find solutions, go forward, build a positive future, and—with God’s help—play a role, however humble, in reviving the dying phenomenon of Civilization. In the same vein as regards the history of Muslims, The First Teaching does not mourn the loss of some mythical “Islamic Golden Age.” Rather, the work seeks realistically to discover a way forward to a brilliant future worthy of our authentic Tradition and its rich past as well as the best accomplishments of Human Beings everywhere and in all times. In this process, there are certainly many impediments that arise and threaten to veil sound understanding. But such veils can be removed by the gentle winds of personal sincerity and interest. When those gusts of truthfulness and good faith fill our sails, they bequeath better understanding of ourselves as Human Beings at all levels of society and ultimately lead to positive civil engagement. Such an understanding is a debt that we owe to Humanity and one of the principal demands of Civilizational renewal in our time. 





Image 18: 















“As idle as a painted ship/Upon a painted ocean.”



Still, I am fully conscious that the approach of this compendium and much of what it contains will be unfamiliar and difficult for many reader-listeners and certainly unwelcome to others, perhaps making The First Teaching—as it were—a modern Book of Strangers. But, as the Prophet Muḥammad said in a well-attested Ḥadīth: “Islam began as a stranger (gharīban), and it will surely return again to be a stranger just as it began. So, good tidings (ṭūbā) to the Strangers.” A relevant Arab proverb observes: “Pleasing [all] people is an objective that can never be attained” (riḍā’ al-nās ghāya lā tudrak). More emphatically, ‘Umar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb and ‘Alī ibn Abī-Ṭālib, the second and fourth Rightly Guided Caliphs of Islam, both said: “Speaking the truth has not left me a [single] friend” (qawl al-ḥaqq lam yada‘ lī ṣadīqan). Although such proverbial wisdom holds for all times and places, it is especially relevant as regards the self-expressive individualism of the Modern Bonsai Ego, which in its more radical forms demands validation and not just acceptance. Thus, the mere act of expressing the truth—even with love and empathy—will displease some, no matter how magnanimous and understanding the attempt may be. But, as Edmund Burke, observed in the twelfth/eighteenth century: “Among a people generally corrupt, liberty cannot long exist.” It is imperative today that we root the Bonsai Ego in meaningful identity, strive to restore our collective Humanity, and remove corruption, and—by that—defend the foundations of freedom.

Image 19:





























Bonsai trees are miniature art works of ancient Japanese culture. The Bonsai Human Being is a failure of present-day civilization.



Throughout this book, I will, nevertheless, strive to express sensitivity for all. Personally, I do not harbor malignant feelings toward any person, or group—religious, secular, sectarian, political, or otherwise—even for those with whom I fundamentally disagree. 





Addressing Reader-Listeners at All Levels

In his well-known Creedal commentary, Sharḥ Jawharat al-Tawḥīd (the Commentary of the Jewel of Divine Oneness), al-Imām Ibrāhīm al-Bayjūrī states: 



I seek refuge in God from protracted length (al-taṭwīl) that exhausts [even] the most ambitious readers (aṣḥāb al-himam), and I put my hope in God to give me the facility (al-tawfīq) for detailed explanation (al-tafṣīl) that will arouse the noble-minded [student] (nabīl) to attain the [furthest] objectives (nayl al-maqāṣid).



It has been one of my guiding principles in The First Teaching to try to abide by al-Bayjūrī’s yardstick insofar as possible. Yet, because of the different goals of this work, I have taken many liberties in my application of his guidelines. For, as indicated earlier, The First Teaching sets its sights on distant horizons far beyond basic Creedal and Doctrinal obligations, in an attempt to address the much broader Societal Obligations regarding belief in our time for all Communities and all peoples. For those students, however, who want instead to focus on the basics of the foundational Creed and its Doctrines, the works cited in the note below are adequate introductions, and—in any case—all reader-listeners should aspire to have copies of them on the shelves of their home libraries and make the fullest use of them to master fully their Personal Obligation (Farḍ al-‘Ayn) of understanding the Creed and its Doctrines. 



Image 20:





















“Let all things be done in a fitting way and good order.”





But—no matter what the breadth and aspirations of this work may be—it is vital, in light of the Islamic Tradition (al-Irth al-Islāmī), that a teacher always strive to speak to people according to their ability to understand. Al-Imām Muslim transmits from the Companion ‘Abd-Allāh ibn Mas‘ūd that the Prophet said: “You will not relate a statement (ḥadīth) to people that fails to meet [the level of] their Intellects (lā tablughu ‘uqūlahum) but that it will be a test [and a tribulation] (fitna) for some of them.” In a similar vein, Ibn ‘Aṭā’-Allāh states in his Aphorisms: “The expressions [of God’s people] are the sustenance of the family of the listeners (qūt li-‘ā’ilat al-mustami‘īn). But you can only have what you can eat (wa laysa laka illā mā anta lahu ākil).” People cannot all eat the same thing. As it is said: “The food of adults is poison for babies.” People are not all able to receive and benefit equally from the same words. In fact, whatever they do take in which is not appropriate for their level may in fact harm them and later lead to doubt and misgivings because they are unable to incorporate it into their understanding and practice.

Image 21:













“The Expressions [of the People of God] are the sustenance of the Family of the Listeners.”



Therefore, it is crucial that teachings be delivered in a manner that accords with each receptor’s capacity. This is a goal that The First Teaching has kept in mind and attempted to accomplish: First, by striving to write in a manner as simple, clear, and intelligible as possible. Second, by providing explanatory footnotes for all information and words that may be unfamiliar to some reader-listeners. Third, by providing professional audial recordings of the entire book and its notes for anyone who wants them. And fourth, by taking an essentially oral-audial approach to the book’s material, which includes training authorized reader-teachers who can personally tailor each presentation to the unique circumstances of each group of reader-listeners. In this fourth respect, The First Teaching has been designed to be read out loud, as has been a common practice in the Islamic Tradition. Reading the book aloud in an essentially ad hoc fashion oriented toward each reader, listener, and reader-listener is meant to enable the book’s instructors to take the unique circumstances of their auditors into account and present the material accordingly. 



In seeking to cultivate a beneficial Teacher-Student bond, The First Teaching searches to find common denominators for presenting its often new and sometimes difficult material in ways that are simpler and more easily understood, so that the work is capable simultaneously of engaging both the well-read and the less well-read, the Scholar and the non-Scholar, despite their very different backgrounds, requirements, and expectations. Indeed, I would like this First Teaching to be a beautiful valley of spring flowers, in which each visitant is free to pick their own bouquet. Thus, throughout the work, I aim never to put erudition on parade. For shows of erudition are masquerades of knowledge, and such academic charades often overwhelm even the sincere Student, having the ultimate effect of veiling knowledge and not of conveying it cogently. Whatever Scholarship this book does exhibit, therefore, is designed only for the cultivation and benefit of every reader-listener. 



Image 22:



















beautiful field of flowers for gathering a bouquet





In all of this undertaking, I seek assiduously to avoid the disaster of creating out of this work just a bouquet of flowers or a mere mantlepiece to be set out for display on coffee tables or tucked away upon library shelves, which no one takes seriously or seeks sincerely to master. Ultimately, The First Teaching is written to open people’s hearts and minds and to teach them how to think and ascertain the Truth for themselves. Above all, the work invites everyone to set out with me collectively on a lifelong quest of active teaching and engaged learning in the search and practice of Truth. In this same vein, my decision to make The First Teaching an essentially oral presentation within the Islamic Tradition of reading books aloud is also an attempt to seek out the simplest ways to get the book’s content to as many people as possible. Thus, the book’s oral dimension is designed to make it like a skeletal grid that can be fleshed out in each situation according to the needs of its readers, listeners, and reader-listeners.





Functional Certitude & the Traditional Teacher-Student Relationship

To begin with, I wish that every reader, listener, and listener-reader—whatever their background or level of their formal education—were, in fact, my personal Student, and I have indeed written this book as if they were. In this regard, The First Teaching seeks to engender, nurture, and cultivate—in so far as possible—a sound Teacher-Student Relationship in keeping with the best legacies of the age-old Islamic Tradition. First, this special Teacher-Student link allows me to compose the book from the standpoint of the convictions I hold and desire that each reader-listener also understand them, if not share and deepen whatever convictions we may share. 



Image 23:



















“A [blessed] Olive Tree, neither of the East nor of the West.” 



Let me emphasize, however, that my use of the term “Student” in this regard is intended in the broadest and most inclusive manner. “Student” here is meant to embrace every listener-reader who is sincerely interested in the Truth and gaining knowledge of it. Moreover, the designation “Student” is not meant to divide potential readers, listeners, or listener-readers into “insiders” or “outsiders.” For a sound Teacher-Student relationship, according to Traditional Islamic norms, opens the doors to all. As noted in The Foreword, Thomas Mann contended that Civilization is Speech. Thus, a dynamic Teacher-Student relationship must cultivate Speech as reciprocal give-and-take in spirited discourse. For, all civil Culture and true Civilization is conversation, as unbelievably difficult as such polite discourse has become for many of us today.



Most important, this Traditional Teacher-Student association is meant to foster a constantly growing relationship of confidence and trust between both Student and Teacher. This mutual confidence between Student and Teacher is essential to the Traditional Islamic view of the sound transmission and cultivation of genuine understanding and true knowledge. Such self-assurance is meant to embody a real fellowship based upon Functional Certitude (al-Yaqīn al-Wāqi‘ī) between both parties in the mutual relationship of teaching, learning, and transmitting knowledge. Sound understanding and true knowledge grow out of profound intellectual conviction based upon trust, and they can rarely ever be derived simply from formal argumentation or assent to a Scholar’s syllogisms.

Image 24:



















Functional Certitude (al-Yaqīn al-Wāqi‘ī) is the foundation of life and a strong Teacher-Student fellowship.



Although it might appear that sound Logical syllogisms should be able to stand alone as proof of the truth, they do not generally perform that function as a matter of fact. Other qualities of the human Soul such as humility, moral submission, and related psychological and Spiritual aptitudes are required before even the clearest and soundest of syllogisms can do their work and have their desired effect. No Human Being can be forced to accept the truth against his will. This Human reality is reflected in the Qur’ān when it speaks of the stubborn opposition of the idolaters of Mecca to the Prophet’s call. On more than one occasion, the idolaters disingenuously and mockingly asked the Prophet to bring God’s Angels before their eyes, so that they could know he was speaking the Truth (Qur’ān, 15:7; 17:92; cf. 6:8; 11:12; 13:31; 17:90-93; 21:3; 25:7; 43:53). In response to such requests, God revealed: 



Even if We had opened up for them a gateway [above them] into Heaven and they had proceeded to ascend through it [higher and higher], they would [still] have said: “Our eyes are only hallucinating. No [undoubtedly], we are a people who have been spellbound by sorcery” (Ḥijr, 15:14-15). 



The immediate context for this Revelation is indicated in the earlier verse in the same Chapter, which states that the idolaters had asked the Prophet: “Why do you not bring us the Angels, if you are among those who speak the truth?” (Ḥijr, 15:7). Ostensibly, they were only demanding to see the Angels as proof of the Prophet’s truthfulness. In reality, however, their question was nothing but mockery, and God indicates that they would have denied the Prophet in all cases—even if he produced the Angels—because they had already forsworn themselves to their state of opposition to him and his Message as well as their denial of the Truth and their doubt regarding it. Thus, it was this defective reflexive psychological state that rendered them incapable of grasping the truth and its proofs, no matter how manifest those proofs might be. 



Truth then is based on a fundamental element of trust and Functional Certitude regarding those who teach us or present it to us. In fact, such Functional Certainties are the primary elements in sound human Culture and Civilization and their transmission and continuity in all times and places, where that actually occurs. Moreover, Functional Certitude is what enables us to live and flourish as functional human beings. For, as human beings, we can only live in the shelter of such assuredness. Our sanity is based on our natural trust and inherent certainty, for example, that truly loving mothers will not put poison in the food and drink they give us, and it is a mark of the insanity of our present time that so many children, men, and women are deprived of this confidence. 



Image 25:

























“Hypocrisy is the homage paid by vice to virtue.”



As a rule, however, even convinced Atheists base their lives upon elements of basic trust rooted Functional Certainty, which are—in themselves—subtle Signs of God’s mercy upon them and without which they too could not live functional lives. Thus, they expect the sun to rise tomorrow as it has for millennia and gravity to continue functioning as it has in the past. Even though the Atheist does not believe in God nor witness His Signs in creation, he still maintains a basic trust in his own existence and in the day-to-day continuity of the basic structure of reality itself. In sharp contrast to the fictional salesman Gregor Samsa in The Metamorphosis of Franz Kafka, even Atheists enjoy the utilitarian confidence that things today and tomorrow will generally continue to be like they were yesterday, and they generally have no fear that they—like Gregor Samsa—will wake up lying helplessly on their backs transformed into huge cockroaches.





Reviving Islamic Universalism & Breaking the Hold of “Proprietarianism”

The First Teaching champions a Universal perspective toward Humanity and history—Human and pre-Human—which—as is often illustrated in the book—is hardly foreign to the Islamic Tradition. Emphasizing such universalism is necessary today in order to help move contemporary Muslim discourse, which tends to be disconnected from the Tradition, beyond the false and myopic perspective of “Proprietarianism.” The renowned Roman playwright Terence, who has long been commended for his insight into Human nature, remarked: “I am a Man: I count nothing Human foreign to me” (Latin: Homō sum. Hūmāni nihil a mē aliēnum putō). This adage should also be the posture that Muslims adopt toward the study not just of themselves and their Tradition but of all non-Muslims, their legacies, and their histories too. For, wisdom and the Human experience are the Universal legacy of everyone, especially the Believer. Al-Imām al-Tirmidhī and al-Imām Ibn Māja transmit that God’s Messenger said: “The word [of] wisdom is the lost camel (ḍālla) of the Believer. Thus, wherever he finds it, he has greater right to it.” In a similar vein, the Prophet is also reported to have said: “Seek knowledge even if in China, for the seeking of knowledge is incumbent upon every Muslim [man and woman].”



If such an all-inclusive attitude can sound genuine on the lips of Terence in the context of the Paganism of Late Antiquity, it should ring even more true on the tongues and in the Hearts of Muslims today. The Rome of Terence ruled much of the inhabited world in its time, but Muslims are the heirs of an even vaster heritage of functional Universalism as reflected in the centuries-long legacy of Islamic Globalism. Under the umbrella of Islamic Globalism, Muslims dynamically engaged all the Human Cultures they encountered on the continents of Eurasia and Africa and the islands of the seas beyond, while taking full cognizance of the integrity of the indigenous peoples and local Communities they met as dictated by Islam’s benign Cultural Imperative. Furthermore, Islam’s inherently broad vision of Humanity and Universal historical experience flows naturally from the Islamic Doctrine of the Universality of primordial Human Nature (al-Fiṭra), which underlies the long Tradition of Islamic Humanism in and beyond the Muslim world. Moreover—as we will see in our discussion of the Prophets and Messengers in Volumes Thirteen through Sixteen—Muslim belief in the legacy of Universal Prophecy makes all Human pre-history and history especially meaningful to Muslims and part of their own comprehensive narrative of themselves and the World in which they live. 



Image 26:























To Man and to each thing He created, God has given a unique primordial Nature (Fiṭra), but Man is Heaven’s Masterpiece.



“Proprietarianism” is obviously the contrary of universalism, and, in the case of Muslims that suffer from it today or at any time, it refers especially to the habit of adopting narrow insular views of the Human legacy and its complex and largely unwritten past, as if only the history of Muslims or accounts taken from the Islamic Tradition were worthy of attention. This view is childish, small-minded, exclusivist, communalistic, possessive—and even sometimes cultish. For “Proprietarian” points of view are narrowly and selectively concerned only with what “belongs to us,” while deeming everything else to be of no value at all or, at best, relatively uninteresting and unimportant.



One of the common examples of Proprietarianism among many Muslims in the West today, for example, is their Cultural aversion to using the English word “God” instead of its Arabic counterpart “Allāh.” As noted earlier in my defense of the word “God,” it is remarkable that—in terms of Indo-European and Semitic linguistics—the root meanings the English word “God” and the ancient Arabic word “Allāh” are so close that they are virtually synonymous. In terms of Indo-European etymology—as we will demonstrate later in Volume Six—the original meaning of “God” is “He who is invoked or supplicated [in prayer].” The word “Allāh,” as we will also demonstrate, is identical to its Hebrew, Syriac, and Aramaic counterparts for “God” in the Biblical Tradition—namely, the words “hā-Elôah,” “Elōhîm,” and “hā-Elōhîm” in Hebrew and Elāhā, Alōhō, and Alāhā in Aramaic and Western and Eastern Syriac . In terms of ancient Semitic linguistics, these Qur’ānic and Biblical cognates for the Creator all share an ancient Semitic root meaning “Him who is [rightfully] worshipped.” Supplication and worship—the core linguistic elements in the words “God” and “Allāh” respectively—are inseparably connected, for, as the Prophet Muḥammad said: “Prayer is the essence of worship (Al-Du‘ā’: Mukhkh al-‘ibāda).” Yet Muslims today tend to look upon “Allāh” as “their word for God,” as if it were their “property.” Not surprisingly, they show little inclination in using “God,” which is not “their property” and is, of course, the term used by Jews, Christians, and many others—although the words are virtually identical in meaning. This same Proprietarian Spirit makes Muslims little disposed to demonstrating explicitly the vast common ground that Muslims, Jews, Christians, and others share—not just in the use of the English word “God” but in many other matters pertaining to Divinity, general belief, and history as well.



But beyond this, Muslims may take ready interest, for example, in how Islamic Philosophy and Science positively affected Medieval Western Europe but without showing any similar concern for how the thought and Science of the Modern West and others before them in the ancient world—especially the Greek Philosophers—have profoundly influenced Islamic discourse. As a consequence, the scourge of Propriatarianism among contemporary Muslims undercuts Islam’s brilliant and intrinsic universality and utterly blinds them from Islam’s profound role in all world history. Consequently, from this parochial perspective, whenever we experience or believe ourselves to have encountered opposition to our worldview and Tradition, we may likely regard such noncompliance as an existential threat and begin grasping at any straws that can save us from it or help us write it off. 



On the contrary, we must strive to understand ourselves, our Tradition, the Other, and the various Schools of thought and conventions to which they all ascribe. Most importantly, in doing this, we must understand that only by moving beyond petty-minded and Soul-destroying “Proprietarianism” can we be truly faithful to Islam and the rich Theological, Metaphysical, Intellectual, Cultural, and Civilizational heritage of Islam’s vast and brilliant Global Tradition. Thus, by virtue of its universalist and “non-Proprietarian” approach, The First Teaching devotes not just extensive attention but genuine and abiding interest to the Jews, Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, Pagans, and others as vital aspects of the Human as well as the Islamic story of Mankind.



There is another type of subtle Proprietarianism that The First Teaching does not condone. It is the notion that people can only speak validly about matters if they are, in fact, the Proprietors of those very things or belong to the respective ethnic or community groups to which they pertain. This mode of Proprietarian thinking is prominent among certain circles today—especially in the so-called “cancel culture”—which regard it as inappropriate, if not “oppressive” for people to speak about or represent ethnicities and Communities other than their own. While there is no doubt that the insider’s view of their own ethnic groups and Communities gives them unique knowledge and insight into themselves and their histories, at the same time, however—and as we will see in our discussion of Human Nature (al-Fiṭra)—all Human Beings are created alike. By virtue of their shared Fiṭra, all people contain the God-given potential to understand and relate to each other on an inherent kinship basis, leading potentially to perfect mutual understanding. The universality of the Fiṭra enables the honest Black to speak intelligently and fairly about the White, just as the truthful White can learn to speak insightfully and beneficially about the Black. There are no inherent or essentialist Proprietarian barriers that make such types of discourse impossible, unacceptable, or inappropriate. Indeed, the Proprietarianism of Modern-day “cancel culture” is predicated upon the assumption—conscious or subconscious—that objective and universal Human knowledge is impossible.



Image 27: 



















To be ignorant of the past is to remain a child forever.



Moreover, in shunning “Proprietarian” mindsets, this book—especially when speaking of “questionable” Muslim figures in the past—takes care to avoid the unenlightened and exceedingly superficial habit of much contemporary Muslim thought of dividing believers into “good” and “bad” Muslims. Such a shallow approach to Islam is also typical of the outwardness and default Islamism of many Muslims today. In line with such a view, many of the representatives of Traditional Islamic Civilization in this book would be undesirable in some Muslim eyes—despite their lasting and very tangible contributions to Islamic and Human thought—because they were not “good” Muslims, as if they should be “canceled” for that reason and deemed as having had nothing to do with the Islamic legacy.



As we will see later, al-Shaykh Zarrūq states that there is no false testimony (shahādat al-zūr) greater than to declare that a certain person will go to the Fire or the Garden without explicit proof from the Qur’ān or the Sunna. Likewise, it is not in the capacity of Muslims to know which Muslims are actually “good” or “bad” in God’s Eyes. Psychological and spiritual realities are too complex, and, after all, hypocrisy often masquerades as piety, while apparent outward impiety may—for a variety of reasons—sometimes conceal inward sincerity and true belief. 



God says in the Qur’ān: “So, do not assert your own goodness: It is He, [God], who knows best those who truly hold Him in reverence” (The Star, 53:32; see also: Qur’ān, 4:49). In the end, it is only God who knows best the true state and ultimate end of every Human being and which of the believers is truly “good” or “bad.” Moreover, the Prophet stated in a rigorously authenticated Ḥadīth in the books of Imāms al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Aḥmad ibn Ḥanbal, and al-Dārimī: “And, truly, God bolsters this religion by [means of] the corrupt man (wa inna-’Llāha la-yu’ayyidu hādhā-’l-dīna bi-’l-rajuli-’l-fājir).” Thus, even the truly “bad” Muslim has an essential and crucial role to play in the unfolding of Islamic history, its various Cultures, and regional and world Civilizations. It is wise, therefore, that the non-Proprietarian Muslim reader-listener avoid making ultimate conclusions about the ultimate standings of past or present-day Believers with God, while every Muslim remains free to reject whatever violations of the Sharī‘a they clearly committed. 



Only by moving beyond “Proprietarianism” does it become possible for people to get to know the Other and themselves. Because today’s Muslims—like many Jews, Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, and others—are often parochial, insular, and distinctly “Propriatarian” in their view of the past, we often know little about our own histories, not to mention those of different peoples. In many cases, we have also been trained and educated under a pale of ignorance regarding major aspects of our own historical legacies which were never brought to our attention. Broadly speaking, for example, Muslims tend to be very conscious of the “fall of Granada and Muslim Spain.” Some would even know that Granada capitulated in the same year, 897/1492, when Christopher Columbus made his voyage across the Atlantic to the Americas, the basic principles of which he learned directly from Muslim astronomers. As a rule, they would also know that before that time “Islam ruled” Muslim Spain for more than seven centuries and produced a brilliant and highly pluralistic Civilization there. The same people would probably lament the “fall of Muslim Spain” and even have an idea about which “impious” persons or parties of “bad” Muslims they ought to blame. Rarely, however, would they understand that Muslim Portugal was also just as essential a part of Iberian Islam as “Muslim Spain.” Paradoxically, they would also probably have little idea of what became of the millions of ethnic Muslims and Jews in Muslim Spain and Portugal who were left behind and “cleansed” after the conquest of the Western Iberian Crusade.



Thus, one of the core purposes of The First Teaching is to help us—as Muslims—develop again the universalist, non-insular, “non-Proprietarian” perspective of our Tradition regarding ourselves and our neighbors throughout the world, one that is faithful to our religious Tradition. But this goal is no less valuable for “Westerners” in Western and Eastern Europe, North America, Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere. For the most part, Westerners—no less than Muslims—as well as Modern historians and thinkers have suffered from their own insular and “Proprietarian” views of themselves and often surprising ignorance of their profoundly shared global histories with Muslims and others. Although there are notable exceptions, we have all been marked by the myopic view of ourselves and the past, and the history of the “West” has—for generations—been studied as essentially exceptionalist and independent from the West’s relations with other high Cultures and Civilizations—especially those of the vast Islamic world. 



In today’s complex and potentially dangerous global world, failure to grasp the Human story as a whole is a prelude to misunderstanding, miscalculations, and perhaps even destruction. Just as the insularity of Muslims harms them and their view of the world today, so also is it necessary for Western and Eastern Europeans, North Americans, and others to liberate themselves from the shackles of any lingering insular or Proprietarian views of themselves and their historical legacies. At the same time, they should seek diligently to imbibe sound, yet honest and authentic views about where we all belong in our shared Humanity and the universal story of synthetic history, which is one of the chief purposes of Occidentalism as it is presented in the Syntopicon that follows and Volume Five. 





Image 28: 





















“A good heart is the sun and the moon.”



Pedagogical Imperative of Teaching History & Languages

The American Muslim Human rights activist Malcolm X, al-Ḥājj Mālik al-Shabāzz, remarked in April 1383/1964 during his pilgrimage to Mecca: 



Here I am, back in Mecca. I am still traveling, trying to broaden my mind, for I’ve seen too much of the damage narrow-mindedness can make of things, and when I return home to America, I will devote what energies I have to repair the damage.



The proper study of history and languages invites universalism and tends to undo Proprietarianism. Consequently, proper exposure to history and languages belongs to the essentials of a good education and helps lay the foundations for a healthy society based on sound understanding of ourselves and the Other. Such edification helps immensely to broaden the mind, remove narrowness, and offset the types of damage such short-sightedness brings about. Shortly before his assassination in the year that followed Malcolm’s pilgrimage, he asserted wisely: “It is impossible to understand the present or prepare for the future unless we have some knowledge of the past.” Traditional oral storytellers in West Africa say:



We are vessels of speech. We are the repositories that harbor secrets many centuries old. History holds no mystery for us. The world is old, but the future springs from the past.



The future will always spring from the past—often independent of individual consciousness and volition—even when the past has been intentionally concealed, distorted, long forgotten, or never known at all. Today, perhaps more than ever before, it is urgent that we edify ourselves as “vessels of speech” and rediscover the secret repositories of our lost histories—especially the dimensions of synthetic history, whether Occidental, Islamic, or global. It is the revival and rectification of such critical links that strengthen our largely invisible bonds with other cultures, nations, and Civilizations and enable us to make preparations for a better future. Authentic historical narratives are not merely fascinating mirrors of the past. Rather, they are essential components to understanding ourselves, Others, and the present, so that we can make ourselves ready for the challenges that lie ahead.



Image 29: 























“Man is a history-making creature who can neither repeat his past nor leave it behind.”





The noted Church historian and Biblical Scholar Adolf von Harnack said:



The study of each single religion ought, by no means, to be separated from the study of the history of the people concerned. To try to study the religion alone is a more childish undertaking than to examine only the roots and blossoms instead of the whole plant.



The First Teaching ascribes to this view of von Harnack and attempts to apply it—not just to Islam—but to the universal phenomenon of Human history, religion, and Culture in general. We certainly cannot understand Islam without understanding Muslims and their history—especially as that on-going historical encounter continually overlaps and intermeshes with the history of Western and Eastern Europe—but neither can we understand the Occident without placing it in a broader context, while viewing it through sound historical Paradigms and Cognitive frames that bring to light of its vast shared history with the Islamic world and other neglected elements of the European past that are often unknown or just being discovered. More specifically, we—as Westerners or non-Westerners alike—cannot unravel the very negative yet virtually “religiously Doctrinal” views that Westerners generally inherit about Islam and Muslims because they have not been shown how—without prejudice—to place Islam and Muslims in the context of the development of Western Christian Culture and Civilization over more than a millennium and their complex yet intimate relationship to Islam and Islamic Civilization.



The Scholar of American religions, Martin Marty, diagnoses Americans in particular as suffering from amnesia of our history and the reality of who we are. Shortly after September 11, 2001, the American historian, broadcaster, and writer Studs Terkel warned Americans of our dangerous habit of ignoring the past, which he called our “national Alzheimer’s disease.” He noted that we retain little memory of former times—hardly even of yesterday—and he warned that, in the wake of September 11, this menacing flaw—if it should continue un-mended—will constitute a grave peril, for such serious shortcomings make it difficult for us to understand the world we live in or respond wisely to the pressing challenges that now face us.



The noted American writer Lewis Lapham also rebukes us for not remembering history but adds to that our collective failure to take foreign languages seriously and teach and learn them in earnest. He asserts that the two deficiencies—loss of historical memory and language illiteracy—go hand-in-hand. The great German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe said: “Whoever does not know foreign languages, knows nothing of his own” (German: Wer fremde Sprachen nicht kennt, weiß nichts von seiner eigenen”). A French adage states: “To learning a new language is to live a new life” (French: Apprendre une langue, c’est vivre de nouveau).



The Swiss poet Heinrich Federer, who knew his own German tongue well and also mastered French and Italian—the other two primary languages of Switzerland—likened French to an elegant geometric public garden. Italian, to him, seemed like a far-reaching, bright, and many-colored woodland in the Italian Piedmont in springtime. But Federer likened his own German language to a dense primeval forest without any single, large thoroughfare, full of secrets and thousands of meandering pathways in which it is easy to get lost and never be found again. Federer recognized that each of the three languages—each endowed with its unique genius—constitutes a distinct cognitive world, although they all are perfectly capable of generating with precision the expressions, Paradigms, and Cognitive Frames that human thought requires in order to fly and ultimately soar. The same can be said about other languages: Spanish, for example, possesses an intimacy, clarity, and directness that truly makes it—as is often said—ideal for “speaking with God.” As for Arabic, which ranks—as we will see illustrated below—among the purest and most ancient of the Semitic languages and known human tongues, it may be compared to flying on the back of a great mythical eagle, which you direct to some distant destination, but that shows you the topography, places, and secrets below you or on the horizons that you would not otherwise have seen or even imagined.



Image 30:













Visual Metaphors for French, Italian, German, and Arabic.



Not only have many people today become largely ignorant of history and foreign languages, but we are also collectively ensnared in the potentially catastrophic process of losing knowledge what authentic history and accurate language usage are still left for us, even in the native tongues we speak. As regards the gift of language in particular—without meaningful speech and its vigilant protection and careful use—people, once robbed of correct and fully meaningful language, easily become mere pawns in the schemes of interest groups and power elites. To subjugate and rule a people or nation, its language must first be debased and destroyed. Liberation and freedom require Truth. To destroy freedom, Truth must also be destroyed. One of the most direct and effective means of undermining and destroying Truth is the degradation of language. On the other hand, to liberate a people and unleash their best hidden potential, the gift accurate, powerful, and meaningful language must be given back to them.



The Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions, which we will discuss in detail below in Volume Four, forbade the former Jews and Muslims of Iberia from speaking, writing, or cultivating Hebrew and Arabic. At the same time, it coerced them—on pain of death—to adopt the Galician Portuguese or Castilian Spanish dialects of their Crusader conquerors. This antagonistic politics of language was essential to the imperial consolidation of the Catholic State in Iberia and the domination of the Portuguese and Spanish colonizers in Iberia and abroad. Similarly, when enslaved Africans were brought to the Americas, they too were not allowed to keep and cultivate their beautiful and highly expressive African tongues, which would have helped them preserve their Identity and restored a modicum of their stolen dignity. Instead, they were forced to adopt highly simplified Pidgin or more fully developed Creole variations of their subjugators’ languages—but without being allowed to study systematically and master the tongues of their oppressors, in order to learn to read or write them in the same manner and with the same facility as their colonial masters.



Prodicus said: “The right use of terms is the beginning of knowledge.” Antisthenes stated: “The examination of terms is the beginning of education.” Well-developed languages reflect and fortify the Intellects of their speakers. Giambattista Vico held that language and thought are so inextricably bound together that the course of language development is an indispensable part of Human and Intellectual history. As Vico understood, language and cognition always go hand-in-hand: We cannot think without language, and language both guides and determines the perfection, precision, and depth of our thought. Étienne Bonnot de Condillac asserted: “Science is only language well posed.” This crucial use of language in thought applies not just to Empirical Science but to all Human endeavors involving the Intellect. Jean Borella observes:



Thought is mental movement in search for an object. It is inherently oriented toward an objective referent by way of a concept. Language is to support, express, and communicate thought. Thought has primacy. Truth, coherence, and non-contradiction arise from both thought and language well-used.



We must know what we mean by the words we employ, and we must know how to use them properly. Sound grammar—which is the built-in Logic of language—ensures good structure and the proper direction of thought. Logic, on the other hand—which is the grammar of thought—ensures the sound structure of the prose, poetry, or symbolism that we arrange for discovering the Truth and making proper use of it. Our language requires continuity and stable as well as accurate, based on established lexical meanings and their articulate connotations. Disciplined and coherent language, sound Paradigms of thought, and fertile Cognitive Frames are—as we will demonstrate in Volume Eight—essential to Theology, Metaphysics, Science, and every project of the Intellect. Dictionaries—Traditional dictionaries based on authentic etymologies—are among the best friends and most faithful guardians of language. It is the lexicon first and foremost that helps to preserve each language’s linguistic gold standard from generation to generation. 



In the Traditional Islamic world, Muslims read and memorized dictionaries from cover to cover under the supervision of their teachers with full authorization (ijāza) as an essential part of their training in the Instrumental Sciences (‘Ulūm al-Āla), which are the prerequisites of the other Sciences. It is no coincidence that when Malcolm X, while still in prison, set out to prepare himself for his Muslim ministry, he began by carefully studying the dictionary from cover to cover. Like him, we must rediscover the value of dictionaries, especially their etymologies and precise denotations. Opening the dictionary brings language to life and helps undercut the presiding reign of mendacious and hollow words.



Today, Human Beings are faced everywhere with the rapid degeneration of language, which bodes ominously for the future unless the decay is stopped and language can be restored to its proper place. In the history of fallacies, the use of words without carefully defined meanings is one of the most common of all cognitive errors and deceptions. Strictly speaking, it is not fallacious when a thinker fails to define his terms. It is just a deficiency and an inconvenience for others, even if he personally knows their meanings and uses them well. But the falsification of everything has become one of the characteristic features of our time, and, of all these falsifications, the subversion of language—which will be examined later in “the Age of Plastic Words”—stands out as one of the most pernicious of all. It is in the light of the imperative of defining terms and using them correctly that The First Teaching seeks to clarify systematically the words it uses, while also providing the Teaching Gloss at the end of this Volume, which collects the most important of them.



Image 31:

















“If the doors of perception were cleansed everything would appear to Man as it is: Infinite.”



Today words and expressions are systematically misused and diverted from their true meanings. Such engineering of language is to some extent accomplished by the constant suggestions that are instilled in people’s minds by those who exercise the greatest influence over the public—such as, for example, the media and “activist” academia. Here, we are no longer just speaking of the “degeneration” of language but its actual and intentional “subversion.” This engineering of language applies Traditional words to things which they do not fit and sometimes in a sense directly opposed to their authentic meanings. This falsification of language—even at the highest levels where language ought to be preserved, especially in academia—is one of the most profound causes of the Intellectual confusion which reigns in our present-day world. Academic scholar-activists, for example, have devised specialized languages. They use everyday words that people trust and assume that they already understand, but by perverting them in a manner wholly different from that common understanding and which violates the basic trust that language culturally assumes we will keep. These new words radiate from an unsound and foreign cognitive territory that is intellectually a world apart from the ordinary person, and this dissonance also makes meaningful communication and real debate with “activist” scholars and their disciples virtually impossible. Such abuse of language first inflicts partial blindness upon its authors, which makes so many “scholar-activists” today oblivious to the repercussions and consequences that come about through their falsifications.



Use and abuse of language, Paradigms, and Cognitive Frames is one of the greatest recurrent disasters in the intellectual history of human thought. Precise articulation of exact vocabulary, rich Paradigms, and right-minded Cognitive frames is an act of liberation and not just cogent thought. On the other hand, manipulation and distortion of language, Paradigms, and Cognitive frames is an act of subjugation and treason and not just an obstruction to cogent thinking. The distortion of language and thought as well as other inversions of reality is the hallmark of the Antichrist and the chief characteristic of the social, cultural, political, and economic systems he and his minions propagate over the generations. His title in Arabic, al-Masīḥ al-Dajjāl (the false and greatly deceiving messiah), explicitly identifies him—as we have noted above and will discuss in detail later—as the “father of lies,” the master of deceit, and the inverter and perverter of realities. This is one of many features that distinguish him from the true Messiah (al-Masīḥ al-Ḥaqq), Jesus the son of Mary, who—as we have seen above—delivers Humanity from the Antichrist, brings the Truth back to life, and rescues reality from diabolical inversion. Thus, Christ declared as the hallmark of his Message: “And you shall know the truth, and the truth will set you free” (John, 8:32).



                            Image 32:





















Our eyes are the windows of our Souls. Like the voice of the Sea, Nature’s beauty speaks directly to our Hearts: “Yet mountains are the beginning and the end of all natural scenery.”



The perversion of language and mental constructs provides harmful propaganda and false ideologies powerful and lasting means for their injurious, dulling, and disempowering effects. Such corruption is the hidden toxin that makes it possible for the enemies of Truth to poison minds, turn realities upside down, and blind people to what is real, even when the Truth is perfectly clear and on display right before their eyes. Getting language right and setting fruitful mental constructs is—at once, therefore—a cultural, civic, and moral service and obligation of the highest order. Ralph Waldo Emerson said: “The corruption of man is followed by the corruption of language.” In fact, however, the corruption of language and Human Beings usually go together so closely that they become virtually indistinguishable. Yet, the opposite holds as well: The restoration of sound language goes hand-in-hand with the rehabilitation of Human Beings and the restoration of their in-born goodness and integrity. 



Image 33:



















“Beauty is the splendor of Truth.”





There Is No God but God: Without God, There Is No Man



Inherited with Life—Belief—but once—can be—Annihilate a single clause—And Being’s—Beggary—



                   ~ Emily Dickinson



The First Teaching is an Apology for Islam—an honest defense of an authentic but much maligned primordial Prophetic faith, which deserves to be defended. Nothing about the book, however, is apologetic. On the contrary, the work honestly, confidently, and wholeheartedly advocates the primordial Prophetic faith of Islam as a dignified living religion with a unique historical record, which has repeatedly proven itself to be panacea for Human ills and a catalyst for generating the gift of Civilization. The compendium strives to accomplish this vindication on the basis of sound demonstration and knowledge—as I hope every sincere reader-listener will clearly see for themselves. Today, Islam remains very much alive and is hardly a by-gone historical venture, fit only for postmortem academic forensics or being catalogued away along with other dusty artifacts of a dead past. 



People frequently asked the late German Scholar of Islamic studies Annemarie Schimmel: “Why do you like Islam?” She would typically answer: “Because Muslims take God seriously.” In this same tenor, it is the goal of The First Teaching to take God in earnest as He deserves to be taken and, by that, to open up the doors for every listener-reader to do the same. More than anything else, people today need to rediscover the meaning of life, regain access to their Lord Creator, and take Him seriously.



Image 34:

















“Great things are done when Men and Mountains meet.”





“There is no god but God (Lā ilāha ill-Allāh).” But without God, there is also no Human Being worthy of that designation. Thus also: “There is no god but God.” But correlatively: “There is no Man without God.” As a rule, generalizations are hazardous, but this sweeping statement about our inherently Human need for God—as will be fully discussed in Volumes Six and Eight—is central to our universal Primordial Nature (al-Fiṭra) as God-created beings. The centrality of God-consciousness to Human Beings is an assertion that lies at the heart of Islamic Humanism—as we will see in what follows—and it is a major theme of The First Teaching, just as, I believe, the harms of losing sight of God are an unavoidable conclusion in our time. 



All the entangled and endlessly proliferating problems we face today—in the Environment, our personal psyches, and our societies—go back, directly and indirectly, to our collective heedlessness toward God and ignorance of our intrinsic Human disposition as created, living Souls whom God put on earth in order to know and worship Him, while serve Him on earth as His Stewards. In the verses cited above, Emily Dickinson echoes, therefore, a central Islamic refrain in asserting that each of us—as Human Beings—has inherited at birth the gift of true belief. Today, however, so many in our generation have not just annihilated one tenet of their belief birthright, but every single clause. Consequently, the reality we live—privately and communally—has been reduced to beggary everywhere, and both Humanity and the natural world now stand on the brink of destruction in a way unlike anything we could have ever imagined before. 



We need God, and we must meet Him again on the ground of nature and all the world around us. Bishop Burgmann said:

 

    Civilized man no longer meets God at all on the ground of nature. God is ignored. Civilized man is confident that he has no need of this hypothesis. This, in effect, makes man his own god. But, if there is anything “serious” in this world, it is because of its connection with what lies beyond. If we remove God from our conception of the universe, then the world becomes a desert of rocks or ice—a hell of hot or cold—it is deprived of life and warmth. 

     But profane Man has no awareness of these Realities. With the assurance of a sleepwalker, he moves exclusively in the fragile content of the cosmic fabric, the divine craftsmanship of which he knows little or nothing about or has forgotten. Thus, he has an unrealistic overestimation of himself as well as the things and facts that he discovers, as if phenomena were absolute and as if earthly life were eternal. In this there is a prodigious lack of imagination, all the more astonishing and absurd in that it affects people who are supposed to be intelligent and who claim insistently that they are, but who forget that intelligence is the perception of the real and not the “intellectualization” of the unreal.



Sir Muḥammad Iqbāl knew well the Reality of which Bishop Burgman speaks, and he sums up the staggering disparity between the penury of Godlessness and ignorance, so typical of our time, and the gifts of Godliness and true belief. He gauges the bewilderment of Godless Man, the self-assured sleepwalker—lost in the horizons, lost in himself and his world—who takes himself as god and turns everything around him into an unintelligible desert of rocks or ice—a hell of hot or cold—deprived of life and warmth. His extreme self-inflicted poverty—masquerading as wealth—robs him of his Humanity, bringing with it the unmistakable privations that we witness almost everywhere in the Modern world. Iqbāl measures this state of utter loss against the state of the Believer—the Man of God—based upon the sound Science of Divinity and careful Spiritual training—the richness of whose world opens up his horizons to Self-knowledge and cognizance of the vast perspectives of objective Reality—as it truly is—which bring with them the greatest of all Human, Spiritual, and Civilizational perfections. Iqbāl states:



The disbeliever’s Sign is that he is lost in the horizons;   

            The Sign of a believer is that the horizons are lost in him.   




                           Kāfir kī yē pehchān kē āfāq meiñ gum hai

                 Mōmin kī yē pehchān kē gum iss meiñ haiñ āfāq.



Relativism has become a pronounced feature of Modern and post-Modern thought. It trains us to be skeptical of any type of Human knowledge that asserts certitude and lays claim to the Holy Grail of Truth. Totalitarian relativism undercuts and disqualifies all pretentions that aspire to escape from relativity or satisfy the limitations inherent in our Intellects and modes of perception. When speaking about Truths and values, relativism prompts us to say: “It might be; it might not be.” But it makes us uncomfortable to take the liberty to assert: “It is.” Two other maladies reign in the relativism of contempoary thought: “Openness to everything” and “being closed to everything. T. S. Eliot says in the Four Quartets:

 

Go, go, go, said the bird: humankind

Cannot bear very much reality.



Relativism is an example of cognitive polarization. By nature, it is reductionist and agnostic. It dissolves all standards of truth and all absolute moral imperatives other than its own. This skepticism extends even to the first principles of intellect and other commonsense understandings that have been the bedrock of the cultures and civilizations of previous generations. Our relativist generation is trained to doubt all beliefs and absolutes out of hand, even before knowing what they are or examining their theological and philosophical merits. Paradoxically, the “openness to everything” that relativism promotes has closed our minds to the most important truths and made us capable of amassing information but not gaining knowledge or wisdom. In his poem The Wasteland, T. S. Eliot laments our modern dilemma of being unable to discern the truth and follow it to wisdom and the adoration of God:



                        All our knowledge brings us nearer to our ignorance,

                        All our ignorance brings us nearer to death,

                        But nearness to death no nearer to God.

                        Where is the life we have lost in living?

                        Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge?

                        Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?



Thus, in light of its purpose, The First Teaching strives to demonstrate the internal rationale and uniquely rich content of Islam’s primordial Prophetic worldview and its applicability as a healing elixir for the various toxicities that have contaminated our generation, deluded our minds, and devastated our Environment. To do this, the book teaches Islam from the interior, from “the inward out”—that is, from the internal perspective of the Muslim believer—for the teachings of other peoples and their faiths ought to be studied from the inside to be truly profitable. But, in adopting its detailed in-depth approach, this compendium also seeks to serve each reader-listener as a broad standard reference for Human cognition and knowledge, so that, hopefully, it may become a portable personal University, summoning us all—each in his own way—to strive for real knowledge in our time—knowledge that gives meaning to life and is worthy of being called by the name of “true knowledge” because it is properly rooted, unified, and readily comprehensible. 



In this regard, The First Teaching seeks to promote extensive further contemplation, study, writing, and teaching. It hopes to contribute to the new generation of researchers and Scholars—in Divinity, Metaphysics, the elaboration of First Principles, A Priori Truths, and the fuller development of the material Sciences, history, art, architecture, and other fields.



Image 35:

















Still waters run deep.



From my personal point of view, The First Teaching is a vision, an endeavor, and a lifework. It compiles extensive information, assimilated and synthesized over a lifetime. Furthermore, for me, the book attempts to fulfill the requirement of Ijtihād (personal diligence and struggle to discover truth) in the study of Divinity and the service of sound Prophetic belief. We will discuss later in greater detail the debate among Islamic Scholars of Divinity about whether or not the discipline of the Divine Science requires Ijtihād from each believer or allows for taqlīd (uncritical acceptance). Many Scholars of Divinity held, however, that their pursuits differed fundamentally from those of Islamic substantive regulations (al-Fiqh) in that each person—even one who is uneducated—must undertake their own individual Ijtihād, despite their limitations, in seeking to grasp the proofs of belief, according to their aptitudes and abilities. 



Each person must, however, also present their personal endeavors in the Divine Science to others so that their achievements can benefit others, while their mistakes can be corrected. We learn from experience and from positive Intellectual exchanges and interchanges over time. A well-known Latin aphorism states: “One day instructs the next” (Diēs diēm docet). As The First Teaching comes to light, it will naturally be shown to contain mistakes and shortcomings. Consequently, I invite improvements and corrections as well as beneficial clarifications and additions. In the same vein, I wholeheartedly welcome and encourage advice and help in revisions, simplifications, and various other renditions—Scholarly, artistic, and otherwise—which I hope to incorporate into future editions.



With the hope of becoming a dependable all-inclusive resource—not just about Islam but the entire Human and universal Prophetic legacy—The First Teaching aspires to help the reader, listener, and listener-reader—especially those who are Muslim—rediscover and renew the Islamic Tradition in the Modern world as a positively humanizing “Cultural Imperative,” which we introduced earlier, and builder of Civilization (al-‘Umrān). Thus, wherever Islam spread in the pre-colonial past, it generally remained true to itself, while also taking on and reflecting the local color of all that was good in the indigenous Cultures it engaged. Thus, the Sharī‘a or Prophetic Code in its wisdom, manifested itself like a crystal-clear life-giving water that reflected faithfully the diverse colors of the bedrock which it covered. In China, Islam looked Chinese. In Africa it looked African, and in Europe it looked European—never finding itself alien in any environment where it spread. For virtually a millennium during the Age of Islamic Globalism, the words Islam and sophisticated, pluralistic Civilization were virtually synonymous. Today just like yesterday, the authentic Islamic faith remains capable of performing that monumental task once again. But, for the Prophetic Tradition to operate once more as a Civilizational catalyst, we—the present generation of Muslims across the world—must first purify our Souls and renew our Hearts so that we can bring to life our forgotten Tradition, build dynamic Communities that embody that Tradition, and—once again—strive to make our Prophetic faith a tangible alternative and an enduring well-spring of good for our lives, the Environment, and all of our neighbors, whether globally, at home, or wherever they may be. 



Image 36:

















Given its inherent “Cultural Imperative,” Islam traditionally took on the mosaic richness of the indigenous cultures it encountered, like the clear life-giving waters of a lake faithfully reflect the colors of the bedrock beneath them.





Thomas Wolfe asserted in his last work, You Can’t Go Home Again, which was published in 1359/1940, shortly after his death: “I believe that we are lost here in America, but I believe we shall be found.” What Wolfe discerned in his time about his native land has now clearly become a principal concern for not just the United Staes but the whole world. We are all living in danger of losing ourselves in narrow-minded tribalism, divisive nationalism, and cruel racism, even including the perpetration of blatant acts of genocide as flagrant as anything in our previous or recent history. Yet, we too must all aspire to be found again before it is too late, and we should fix our Hearts on the ancient Latin motto: “Ad astra per aspera” (Through adversity, [we will] reach the stars.) 



In the last century, Bishop Ernest Burgmann articulated well humanity’s profound Spiritual dilemma today:



Wandering, as they are, in the wilderness of distracted minds, people everywhere feel insecure. They are no longer rooted anywhere. There is intense and widespread loneliness; they seek comradeship anywhere at any price. The day of the tribe returns. Man is seeking for some strong tribal body, with its tribal leaders to relieve him of the responsibility of making personal decisions, and the modern tribe is larger than in the days of old. Now it can be a nation, or the people of a continent, or of continents. In the Western world it represents the retreat of a people who have lost the guidance and support of a higher faith. This emotional regression is a very serious matter in a highly rationalized and artificial environment. 



In similar terms, although in a secular vein, Hannah Arendt emphasized that it is exactly the presence of multitudes of insecure, uprooted, and alienated people in the world today that provides the raw material needed to produce the modern juggernauts of the technologically-based totalitarian State. She stated succinctly: “Totalitarian movements are massive organizations of atomized and isolated individuals.” 



Today, with the ascendance of the modern emotive Bonsai Self, the very notion of Identity has itself become fragmented, unstable, and highly contentious in a manner unprecedented in history. Each of our imploded, alienated, and atomized human selves has come to constitute “a house divided against itself that cannot stand.” Consequently, Humanity today has become fractured and fragmented, estranged from Reality as never before—at the individual and communal levels. As this book hopes to demonstrate beyond question: “Without God, there is no Man,” and when people reach such a plight of personal and communal loss, it is impossible for them to remain sane, to find themselves, or to discover and recognize “the one thing needed” without earnest help. First, that fragmentation, atomism, and alienation have to be mended. Then, second, we must all be put back together again. Yet this miracle can only be done with sound and meaningful religious rebirth that completely fulfills the inherent needs of “Man the Believer”, Homō Religiōsus.



Image 37:

























“A house divided against itself cannot stand.”





In this regard, Yasiin Bey says: “The main thing is to keep The Main Thing the main thing.” Only then can authentic meaning and human resilience be restored. Divisive racist and extreme nationalist sentiment today grows out of the broadly defined and easily manipulated fears that we as such forlorn and abandoned Human Souls harbor in our Hearts. Multitudes today live nightmares of feeling helpless, betrayed, and victimized in the Modern world, where tribalism, nationalism, racism, and similar deviations express their inflamed desire to count for something, but where—instead—they continually find themselves ignored, disregarded, and even despised.

  

Arnold Toynbee agreed with Bishop Burgmann’s assessment of the failure of the higher faiths today in addressing basic Human, Intellectual, and Cultural needs. In his view, we live at a time when the higher religions rarely provide their followers with “the one thing needed,” because those faith-communities themselves are struggling to survive, and they and their followers often appear as bewildered and confused by the omnipresent challenges of Modernism as anyone else. Thus, in a manner similar to Burgmann, Toynbee speaks of Modernist Man’s “regress-in-progress,” which, in his view, is essentially a Spiritual retrogression that has diverted human energies from “the one thing needed” in addition to any healthy natural and Spiritual channels to attain it. In such a Spiritual vacuum, it is impossible to preserve personal happiness, psychological stability, relate to the natural order, and receive the gift of Civilization. Thus, Human Beings have turned everywhere to harmful material gratifications and mindless outlets that threaten to bring about the collapse of global Civilization and usher in an Environmental Apocalypse. If not corrected, this “regress-in-progress” may eventually destroy us all and the planet upon which we live. Toynbee believed that this ubiquitous Spiritual crisis confronting Human Beings and the higher religions today constitutes a greater ordeal than anything we have ever faced before. In the light of the break down and disintegration of earlier Civilizations, he feared that Humanity is now in the process of transforming itself from what could well have been the shared communal treasure of a “Commonwealth of God” into a universally detrimental “commonwealth of swine.” Only by restoring meaning to life and the essential elements of continuity and Community—which only higher religion at its best can provide—will it be possible for Man to dream again of Civilization as a “Commonwealth of God” that repairs Mankind and restores the earth and its natural Environment.



Image 38:

















“There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are to come with those who shall come afterwards.” 



The First Teaching seeks to play a constructive role in confronting this global ordeal of “regress-in-progress,” in which we are all now living. It aspires to make the reader-listener cognizant in today’s world and the crises that our Global Monoculture faces, while providing meaningful answers rooted in “the one thing needed.” In this endeavor, the book aims to present a consistently authentic, Traditional worldview that enables us to see through the present-day fogs of fallacy and distortion so that we can exorcize the demons of the present by awakening our hearts to the great meaning, beauty, and harmony that permeate ourselves, nature, and the universe around us. In presenting such alternatives, the book attempts to replace Wrong-Headedness with sound judgment in order to help convert Metaphorical Knowledge, which is horizontal, into real and truly beneficial knowledge, which is vertical. Only then can we unravel the Knots of our Souls and perhaps become truly Human once again.



Image 39:























Let us honor if we can

                                                                           The vertical man

                                                                           Though we value none

                                                                           But the horizontal one.





School Affiliation





The Middle Way Is the Only Way

The First Teaching is based on “the Middle Way (al-Madhhab al-Mutawassiṭ)” of the Majoritarian Sunnī Community, Ahl al-Sunna wa al-Jamā‘a (the People of the Prophetic Way and the Mainstream Consensus), which, throughout history, has represented the vast majority of Muslims everywhere and stands out as the beacon of Islamic Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy. Throughout its long historical record, mainstream Sunnī Theology has predictably sought to take the Middle Path or center course of balance and moderation between opposing extremes within and without the Muslim community. In his treatment of problematic issues regarding Divinity, for example, al-Imām al-Māturīdī often states explicitly that the authentic Scholar must always prefer the “Middle-of-the-Road.” He asserts that, as a rule, the correct approach to any given problem will only be found in “the Middle Way (al-Madhhab al-Mutawassiṭ) between two extremes.” In his own personal practice and teaching, al-Māturīdī consistently sought out the “Middle Way,” not because it was politically expedient but because, in his experience as a uniquely great Scholar and thinker, he found that only the Middle Path constituted the correct methodological approach to all problems in general—whether they pertain to the Divine Science, the Sharī‘a, or other Sciences and fields of knowledge—since the truth predictably lies in the middle ground between its opposites. 



Likewise, al-Imām al-Ghazālī asserts:



It is a definitive obligation in [investigating] the foundations of belief to maintain moderation and steadiness on the Straight Path. For any extreme in pursuing matters is reprehensible.” 



Indeed, the Tradition of Islamic Orthodoxy has shown repeatedly that the Middle Way is not just the best road: It is the only road. Thus, the early beacon of Greater Syria, al-Imām al-Awzā‘ī, would say: “There is nothing God has commanded but that Satan opposes it by [encouraging] two responses, and he does not care which one he succeeds in inciting [people to follow]: Excessive fanaticism (al-ghulūw) and neglectful delinquency (al-taqṣīr).”



Image 40:

















	







Nothing can be religiously right if it is morally wrong.



Thus, in any given age and under all circumstances, it is the obligation of the Divine Science and Islamic Scholarship in general to blaze the Middle Path of harmony, balance, understanding, and moderation. 



In the Qur’ān, God highlights the fact that He meant for the World Community (Umma) of Islam to embody the golden mean of moderation. He says:



Thus did We make you a Middle Community (Ummatan wasaṭan) so that you may be witnesses for Mankind and so that the Messenger may be a witness for you (The Cow, 2:143). 



In Arabic, the word “middle” or “middlemost” (wasaṭ) as used in this verse connotes what is sound, moderate, balanced, and—by that reason—also the most excellent. For in basic Arabic semantics there is no excellence in anything that lacks moderation and balance. Thus, in Arabic, “middlemost” implies that something or someone with that quality has the most excellent of attributes by virtue of falling midway between every type of excess and extremism. For that reason, to be “middlemost” also means to be worthy of praise by virtue of being free of extremism or other deficiencies. 



One of the standard meanings in Qur’ānic commentary of the expression, “so that you may be witnesses for humankind,” is that the World Community (Umma) of Islam, by virtue of the requisite self-restraint and moderateness that it is meant to embody must prove itself to be a protection for all peoples and nations—not just for Muslims. Thus, Muslims are meant to be the solution and never the problem. A similar verse states: “You are the best Community (Umma) brought forth unto Mankind, enjoining right, forbidding wrong, and believing in God” (The House of ‘Imrān, 3:11). Muslims constitute the best Umma whenever they sincerely emulate the example of the Prophet Muḥammad. Al-Imām al-Bukhārī and other Scholars of the first generations of Islam parsed this verse by saying: “You must be the best of all people to all people.” For only then can Muslims live up to the responsibility of being the best Umma brought forth for humankind.



Some commentators corroborate this meaning of protecting the welfare of others by pointing to the Qur’ān’s reference to itself as a protection for all earlier Revelations:



And We have sent down unto you the Revelation in [utter] Truth, confirming the Book [all generic Revelation] that came before it and as a Guardian Protector over it (Muhayminan) (The Table Spread, 5:48). 



Likewise, the Prophet stands as a witness over the believers in that he protects Muslims from their shortcomings by setting for them the example of moderation in right guidance, wisdom, and balance so that—by emulating him—his followers may always remain in the middle between every excess and extreme. Such moderation enables them to give everything its due and keep proper balance, which is the formula for their perfection and genuine service to others.



Muslims extremists and some inadequately trained Muslims—although they differ greatly in their degrees of ignorance and their practices and perceptions of the world—predictably lack sound grounding in Islam’s authentic Divine Science as well as the Sharī ‘a Sciences. Consequently, they have limited access to both correct Islamic understanding and practice in our times and the deeply rooted, unshakable sanity and profound Spirituality that come with it. Getting our understanding of Divinity right, therefore, is essential to correcting such errors and misconceptions and protecting us, our communities, and our neighbors.



In taking a balanced and universal approach to Islam, The First Teaching naturally rejects narrow dogmatism. The book does not regard itself—despite its unequivocal adoption of the Sunnī Majoritarians—as “anti-” anyone or “anti-” anything. It does not demarcate enemies in any arena, and—as the excursus on toleration and plurality in Volume Two will endeavor to show—sound Islamic conviction must be able to take a position of certainty in faith without holding ill feelings toward those who disagree, whoever they may be and however strong their disagreement.



                            Image 41:





















The history of each religious Dispensation is a constant ebb and flow betweeen Truth and Falsehood, moderation and extremism.





Assessing the Well-Known Sunnī Schools of Divinity

As a work based on affiliation to the Sunnī Schools of Traditional Divinity in Islam, The First Teaching refers often to the contributions of al-Imām al-Māturīdī, al-Imām al-Ash‘arī, and their followers, all of whom it respects and honors. But the book’s own approach to Divinity is not restricted to the Tradition of either Imām, and, indeed, it looks with special favor upon and seeks to benefit fully from the earlier text-based (atharī) approaches in Divinity of the Upright Predecessors (al-Salaf al-Ṣāliḥ) of Islam’s first three generations, who were noted for their scrupulous attention to the Revealed texts of the Qur’ān, the Sunna, and Doctrinal beliefs based solidly upon of Scholarly Consensus (al-Ijmā‘). 



It should also be noted in this regard that, historically, the authentic Sufis of Islam were, in fact, among the closest and most faithful adherents of the Path of the Upright Predecessors (al-Salaf al-Ṣāliḥ) in all things, and much evidence for this will be produced throughout this work. The Sufis have been par excellence a people relying upon the transmitted texts (ahl al-āthār) of Islam, as well as their being advocates of the validity of metaphorical allusions (ahl al-ishārāt) based on those texts. For the Sufis, the two tendencies—literal interpretation and symbolic allusion—have always gone together—and, in a similar manner, the Sufis have always sought to join the inward (al-bāṭin) with the outward (al-ẓāhir) in a harmonious and complementary manner. As we will see, neither the Salaf al-Ṣāliḥ nor the Sufi Saints looked favorably upon the figurative interpretation (ta’wīl) of semblant verses and statements (al-mutashābihāt) in either the Qur’ān or the Sunna. Rather, they regarded such interpretations to be a deficiency that is permissible only for those who lack the ability either to accept the texts as they are without literal renditions of them or grasp the Spiritual depths of the literal references. Throughout this book, I seek to buttress my presentation of the Sacred Sciences by reference to explicit textual proof (al-dalīl) wherever possible, while also advocating sound symbolic allusions based upon those proof-texts.





Introducing Islam’s Corrective Tradition: Madhhab al-Taḥqīq (The School of Verification)





Historical Emergence of the Corrective Tradition

Most importantly, in adhering to Sunnī Orthodoxy and with the aspiration to help give new life to the Islamic Tradition in our time, The First Teaching strongly advocates and seeks, in so far as possible, to elucidate and follow Islam’s little-known “School of Verification (Madhhab al-Taḥqīq),” which also referred to itself as the “Science of Verification (‘Ilm al-Taḥqīq).” In this book, I generally prefer to call the School of Verification as Islam’s “Corrective Tradition” or its “Mature Tradition.” In the Divine Science, Metaphysics, Philosophy, Logic, geometry, mathematics, the Sciences, astronomy, architecture and other fields of knowledge as well, the Science of Verification attained heights that are rarely paralleled in the earlier Islamic Traditions that came before it. Surprisingly, the School of Verification is little known today among Sunnīs and only incompletely understood in most contemporary research and writing—both among Muslims and others, including the best academicians—which should serve as a reminder that our Islamic Tradition can never be taken for granted.* But we say of the great Masters of the Corrective Tradition, whose lives were not in vain: “Their bodies are buried in Peace, but their names live forever” (Ecclesiastes, 44:14).



Image 42:



















“Theory is gray, but the golden tree of life springs forever green.” 



With regard to the Divine Science (al-‘Ilm al-Ilāhī) or the Highest Science (al-‘Ilm al-A‘lā) in particular, the Science of Verification advocated comprehensive study of Metaphysics and intentionally moved away from the typically argumentative (jadalī) and largely topic-oriented dialectical early approach of that characterized the Science of Discourse (‘Ilm al-Kalām) and its specialized Discursive Scholars (al-Mutakallimūn). The Corrective Tradition conceived of the Divine Science as a Revelation-based Metaphysical endeavor to discover a sound and comprehensive view of reality as it actually is and which establishes a unified and synthetic vision of the God’s creation. 



Chronologically, the Corrective Tradition begins with al-Imām Fakhr-al-Dīn al-Rāzī. Nevertheless, the Tradition’s true Master, guiding light, and driving force through the centuries and unto the present day—even, in many ways, for al-Rāzī himself—was his younger contemporary from Muslim Iberia (al-Andalus), al-Shaykh al-Akbar Muḥyī-al-Dīn Ibn al-‘Arabī, the greatest of the Shaykhs and Spiritual Masters. Undoubtedly, Ibn al-‘Arabī’s influence upon al-Rāzī was not as extensive as it would be for later Masters of the Tradition, but it can be seen in his correspondence with al-Rāzī before the latter’s passing, and it is notable that those letters served a “corrective” purpose similar to when the youthful Ibn al-‘Arabī had his famous meeting with the Andalusian Jurist, polymath, and Aristotelian Philosopher Ibn Rushd (Latin: Averroës) about five years before the latter’s passing. It is crucial to assert—contrary to widespread misconceptions—that there is nothing “heterodox” about Ibn al-‘Arabī, as many Muslims today are fallaciously taught. On the contrary, the “wisdom Tradition” of Islamic Spirituality that he imbibed and represents stands squarely at the heart of authentic Sunnī Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy—as we hope to demonstrate throughout The First Teaching. Indeed, even the beginning reader of Ibn al-‘Arabī will note his firm adherence to outward Orthodox Divinity, a point which he frequently emphasizes in his works and which is also abundantly clear from his Scriptural references to the Qur’ān and the Sunna on virtually each page he ever wrote.



Regarding the correctional disposition of the Mature Tradition, even an introductory acquaintance with Ibn al-‘Arabī is sufficient to demonstrate his systematic overview of the entire Intellectual and Spiritual tradition of Islam that preceded him—especially as regards Divinity, Metaphysics, Philosophy, and Sufism. Although the Akbarian Tradition was profoundly mature and distinctly “corrective” from the beginning, it should be emphasized that it was also usually politely, unless—in certain cases—antagonistic Scholars were deemed to be inexcusably high-handed and self-serving. In general, however, the Corrective Tradition was balanced, tolerant, and based on the broad and forgiving spirit of Islamic Courtesy (Adab), which, in their view, dictates that no thinker or School—even the Philosophers (al-Falāsifa) and the Mu‘tazila—should ever be condemned categorically. Rather, each Scholar and his outlook must be viewed fairly, and rigorous distinctions have to be made between what was true and what was flawed or false in their legacies.



Fuller Historical & Intellectual Development of the Corrective Tradition

As the Corrective Tradition came to fruition during the centuries following Ibn al-‘Arabī, the emerging strains of the Akbarian Tradition within it sought to synthesize the insights of the greatest Shaykh, Ibn al-‘Arabī, and link his contributions—as well as those of other great thinkers—with the rich, albeit disputed intellectual legacy of Ibn Sīnā (Latin: Avicenna), whose controversial opinions had already begun to undergo systematic revision by Fakhr-al-Dīn al-Rāzī himself. This process of emending Ibn Sīnā for the purposes of Orthodoxy would continue throughout the development of the Corrective Tradition. 



It must be emphasized at this point, however, that it is a common mistake to assert—as has been typically done in the past—that the post-Ghazālian Tradition of Islam categorically rejected Ibn Sīnā and the earlier Philosophical contributions of Islam. Rather, important strains of the post-Ghazālian Tradition strived to correct them—especially in the School of Verification—just as it often revised the thoughts of others from various backgrounds. These new evaluations of Ibn Sīnā—especially in the light of the greatest Shaykh—enabled the Mature Tradition to develop further and, on occasion, even to surpass Ibn Sīnā. In this manner, the Corrective Tradition rendered Ibn Sīnā’s unique contributions safe, acceptable, accessible, and greatly beneficial for the development of Orthodox thought, such as, for example, in the powerful Metaphysical Paradigm of Necessary Being and Possible Existence, his conception of Space and Time, and in his dynamic reformulation of Logic, in which he built upon and improved the Aristotelian models that preceded him.



Al-Imām al-Ghazālī died shortly before the birth of the Science of Verification and consequently did not take active part in its development. Nevertheless, he should be deemed its herald because he pointed the way to it. Strictly speaking, however, the Tradition did not begin with him, despite his pivotal greatness and restorative influence upon the historical course of Islamic Spirituality and thought. Al-Ghazālī’s lack of a more direct role in cultivating the School of Verification was largely—it seems—because of the relative shortness of his life. His passing came decades before al-Rāzī and more than half a century prior to the birth of Ibn al-‘Arabī. Consequently, al-Ghazālī was unable to benefit from their ground-breaking achievements in solving the seemingly intractable Philosophical issues with which he himself had grappled. Nevertheless, al-Imām al-Ghazālī must be considered a major forerunner of the Corrective Tradition.





 Image 43:

















Great minds think alike, and great Men do not live in vain.



To begin with, al-Ghazālī pointed the way to the Science of Verification through his well-known critique of the Muslim Philosophers, which al-Rāzī and others would attempt to rectify. Secondly, al-Ghazālī recognized that the Discursive Science of Divinity (‘Ilm al-Kalām) should be developed in such a manner as to make it a sound universal science. In seeking such universality for the science of Divinity, he aspired that it meet the definition he set for it in his compendium of Legal Theory Al-Musṭaṣfā min ‘Ilm al-Uṣūl (The Choice Propositions of the Science of the Roots [of Jurisprudence]) as: “The science of what is as it [truly] is, according to the rubric of Islam (Al-‘Ilm bi-al-mawjūd bi-mā huwa mawjūd ‘alā qanūn al-Islām).” As noted earlier, this ideal definition of what ‘Ilm al-Kalām should aspire to be is virtually identical to the meaning of Metaphysics according to Aristotle and Ibn Sīnā, with the all-important difference of establishing Islam as the basic standard for Metaphysics as a Theological science.



As the Science of Verification developed and flourished, it came ultimately to celebrate such Intellectual giants and Spiritual Masters as Ṣadr-al-Dīn al-Qūnawī—the stepson of Ibn al-‘Arabī—Dāwūd al-Qayṣarī, Sa‘d-al-Dīn al-Taftāzānī,  al-Sayyid al-Sharīf al-Jurjānī, Shaykh-al-Islām Mullā al-Fanārī, ‘Abd-al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī, Jalāl-al-Dīn al-Dawānī, Chief Judge Aḥmad ibn Muṣṭafā Taşköprüzade, Muḥammad ibn Luṭf-Allāh Bahā’-al-Dīnzādah, ‘Abd-al-Ghanī al-Nābulusī, Ismā‘īl ibn Muṣṭafā Gelenbevi, Abū-al-Thanā’ al-Ālūsī, and dozens of other paragons of Intellect and knowledge.



As a rule, the masters of the Corrective Tradition were polymaths, excelling not only in the Sharī‘a Sciences, Divinity, Metaphysics, Philosophy, medicine, geometry, mathematics, architecture, astronomy, and the empirical Sciences in general. Four Masters of the Tradition—Naṣīr-al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī, his student Quṭb-al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī, Ṣadr-al-Sharī‘a al-Thānī, and ‘Alā’-al-Dīn al-Qūshjī—worked out and elaborated in detail a consistent heliocentric view of the solar system, which certain Muslim astronomers had already taken over from the Ancient Greeks by the time of al-Bīrūnī, long before the heliocentric hypothesis of Nicolaus Copernicus was published in 950/1543. Following the lead of the Ancient Greeks, Islamic Science had also discovered early that the earth is spherical, but the Scholarship of the Corrective Tradition also affirmed that it rotates on its axis, while undertook precise studies of the moon and establishing the rapid orbit of Mercury around the sun. 



The School of Verification in Muslim China

The Corrective Tradition also includes the foremost Sages of Muslim China, Wáng Dàiyú and Liú Zhì, who were greatly indebted to Ibn al-‘Arabī but became directly associated to the Science of Verification primarily through ‘Abd-al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī. The powerful perspectives of the Mature Tradition in Divinity and Metaphysics enabled the Chinese Muslim Sages to apply Islam brilliantly to the religious worldviews of Neo-Confucianism, Daoism, and Pure Land Buddhism, which predominated in China during their time. Thus, they were able to make Islam fully intelligible and relevant to their Chinese Muslim and non-Muslim contemporaries alike. 



The writings of Wáng Dàiyú and Liú Zhì are not apologetic. In keeping with the School of Verification, which they represented, their purpose was simply to set forth the Truth about Reality and, in the process, explain the true teaching and nature of Islam, but not actually to convince Chinese society of its Truths or defend it from their criticisms. Moreover, their primary audience was not the non-Muslims of China in the first place but their fellow Chinese Muslims—the Huí Huí—who had been educated and trained in the Classical Chinese Tradition and lacked direct access to Arabic or Persian mediums. This ruling class of the Huí Muslims was substantial and, over the generations, had imbibed a thoroughly Chinese worldview. Indeed, ordinary Huí Muslims who lacked similar training in the Chinese Tradition still labored to understand teachings and concepts taken directly from Arabic or Persian, and there was little hope that these mediums would prove sufficient for them. Thus, the imagery, analogies, and modes of argumentation that Wáng Dàiyú and Liú Zhì used were carefully chosen and finely honed for their Chinese Muslim readers and students. But, by cultivating language that the Chinese-educated Huí could readily understand, the two Scholars indirectly attracted a second audience among the Chinese intelligentsia and non-Muslim religious Scholars, many of whom did embrace Islam through their work. Ultimately, the books of Wáng Dàiyú and Liú Zhì were printed and widely distributed among the Muslims and non-Muslims of China alike.





Sunnī-Shī‘a Dialogue in the School of Verification

From its beginning, the Corrective Tradition was largely the product of Masters of Sunnī Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy, but as we have already seen in our treatment of the Shī‘i polymath Naṣīr-al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī and his Sunnī student Quṭb-al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī, the School of Verification was not averse to collaboration between Sunnī and Shī‘a, which stands out as exemplary for many Muslims today.



The fact that the Corrective Tradition was, however, steeped in Sunnī Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy is indicated by the central role in the Tradition of giants in the Sunnī Sharī‘a Sciences such as Ṣadr al-Sharī‘a al-Thānī—whose Arabic honorific title “Ṣadr-al-Sharī‘a” may be rendered “the Vanguard” or “the Preeminent Scholar of the Sharī‘a (the Prophetic Code)”—Shaykh-al-Islām Mullā al-Fanārī, Shaykh-al-Islām Ibn Kamāl Pāshā, and many others. Yet another remarkable example of the strong association of the Corrective Tradition with Sunnī Islam is the fact that the well-known Niẓāmī Curriculum (Dars-e Niẓāmī)—the buttress of Sunnī Orthodoxy and Orthopraxy throughout the Subcontinent of Greater India for more than a century and a half until the present—was itself the product of Sunnī Scholarship within the School. Thus, the namesake of the Niẓāmī Curriculum was Mullā Niẓām-al-Dīn al-Farangī-Maḥallī, an outstanding exemplar of the Tradition and one of the founders of the Farangī Maḥall in Lucknow, India. After Mullā Niẓām-al-Dīn became the director of Farangī Maḥall, he worked energetically to make it a world-renowned center for the School of Verification in the Subcontinent as well as a brilliant center of learning and Culture throughout the Muslim world. When British colonial rule gained the upper hand in Greater India, Farangī Maḥall became known among Muslims as “our Indian Cambridge” (humārē Hindūstān-kā Kēmbrij). In its original form, the Dars-e Niẓāmī included basic components on Divinity, Metaphysical, and Logic taken from the Corrective Tradition along with other standard religious Sciences. In Mughal India, Mullā Niẓām-al-Dīn himself and his son ‘Abd-al-‘Alī Baḥr-al-‘Ulūm were both significant contributors to the further development of the Mature Tradition. 



Image 44:





















“All the rivers run into the sea, but the sea is never filled.”



In general, the Mature Tradition was inclusive, all-embracing, tolerant, and hospitable, despite its being rooted in Sunnī Orthodoxy. From the beginning, both Sunnī and Shī‘ī representatives of the Mature Tradition conducted amicable correspondence between each other on issues pertaining to Divinity, Metaphysics, and Philosophy, and they occasionally worked together for the mutual benefit of all. It must, however, be emphasized that from the earliest period, Sunnī Masters of the Science of Verification exercised positive and lasting influence upon the Shī‘a, culminating in the two renowned Shī‘ī luminaries, Mīr Dāmād and Mullā Ṣadrā. With notable exceptions, neither Shī‘ites nor Sunnīs generally know

 that both of these profound Shī‘a Scholars were part of the broader Sunnī Tradition of the Science of Verification and did not work independently of it. Both Mīr Dāmād and Mullā Ṣadrā were heavily indebted to their Sunnī predecessors, and Mullā Ṣadrā borrows extensively from Fakhr-al-Dīn al-Rāzī, Ibn al-‘Arabī, Dāwūd al-Qayṣarī, Shaykh-al-Islām Mullā al-Fanārī—who was of particular importance for him—‘Abd-al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī, Shaykh-al-Islām Ibn Kamāl Pāshā, and others. Centuries before Mullā Ṣadrā, these Sunnī Masters arrived at conclusions similar to his own, and Mullā Ṣadrā often quotes at length from them in his works. 



As an illustration of this Sunnī-Shī‘ī dialogue in the Mature Tradition, Mullā Maḥmūd Jaunpūrī of the Mughal School of Verification debated Divinity and Metaphysics publicly with Mīr Dāmād. Similarly, it was the Sunnī Master of the Subcontinent Tradition Mullā ‘Abd-al-Ḥakīm al-Siālkūtī  who introduced the works of Mullā Ṣadrā to the Mughal realms. Yet, as a standing testimony to his powerful Sunnī affiliation, Mullā al-Siālkūtī was also a close friend of the bastion of Sunnī Orthodoxy in Greater India, al-Shaykh Aḥmad al-Sirhindī, and it was al-Siālkūtī who conferred the title of “Renewer of the Second [Islamic] Millennium (Mujaddid al-Alf al-Thānī)” upon al-Shaykh Aḥmad al-Sirhindī.







